{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f36\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f37\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f39\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f40\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f41\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}
{\f42\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f43\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f44\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;
\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden 
Default Paragraph Font;}{\*\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid29428\rsid263614\rsid406668\rsid406833\rsid465794\rsid1007033
\rsid1140171\rsid1189469\rsid1391054\rsid1393525\rsid1442720\rsid1510036\rsid1526605\rsid1527214\rsid1710580\rsid1774173\rsid1836364\rsid2174257\rsid2365384\rsid2378647\rsid2506827\rsid2521861\rsid2768103\rsid3018001\rsid3091082\rsid3152395\rsid3438667
\rsid3484311\rsid3826910\rsid4010420\rsid4024083\rsid4074004\rsid4343437\rsid4458933\rsid4855004\rsid5256563\rsid5405989\rsid5639061\rsid5844604\rsid5901490\rsid5964277\rsid5984105\rsid6443564\rsid6817436\rsid6978166\rsid7042238\rsid7104573\rsid7217426
\rsid7224235\rsid7289988\rsid7608686\rsid7874816\rsid7890035\rsid8261878\rsid8657261\rsid8783036\rsid8932586\rsid9256946\rsid9269512\rsid9462255\rsid9638941\rsid9903535\rsid10034847\rsid10242758\rsid10320029\rsid10513060\rsid10696806\rsid10711527
\rsid10837256\rsid10893938\rsid10970162\rsid11020485\rsid11295225\rsid11405993\rsid11484611\rsid11489216\rsid12130998\rsid12389011\rsid12475791\rsid12481955\rsid12869099\rsid12877742\rsid12932906\rsid13188786\rsid13248876\rsid13650793\rsid13719832
\rsid13725411\rsid13967353\rsid14173135\rsid14502520\rsid14886454\rsid15167230\rsid15414908\rsid15415799\rsid15559228\rsid15616058\rsid15926869\rsid15953106\rsid16012381\rsid16123733\rsid16207059\rsid16518090}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 10.0.2627;}{\info
{\title Appalachian Clearcutters Flunk Siliviculture}{\author Hoagie}{\operator Hoagie}{\creatim\yr2007\mo1\dy19\hr13\min21}{\revtim\yr2007\mo2\dy7\hr15\min30}{\version97}{\edmins651}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords1620}{\nofchars9240}{\nofcharsws10839}
{\vern16437}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\hyphcaps0\formshade\horzdoc\dgmargin\dghspace180\dgvspace180\dghorigin1701\dgvorigin1984\dghshow1\dgvshow1
\jexpand\viewkind4\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\splytwnine\ftnlytwnine\htmautsp\nolnhtadjtbl\useltbaln\alntblind\lytcalctblwd\lyttblrtgr\lnbrkrule\nobrkwrptbl\snaptogridincell\allowfieldendsel\wrppunct\asianbrkrule\rsidroot12389011 \fet0\sectd 
\linex0\endnhere\sectlinegrid360\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}
{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\insrsid6978166 The following article was first published in }{\i\insrsid6978166\charrsid15926869 Wild Earth, vol. 2}{\insrsid6978166  , #1, pp 69-70, 1992}{\insrsid15926869 
. Some changes in punctuation hav}{\insrsid9903535 e been introdu}{\insrsid7224235 ced into the text. Also, a }{\insrsid14502520 correction}{\insrsid7224235  and an addition are}{\insrsid9903535  enclosed in brackets.}{\insrsid6978166\charrsid6978166 

\par }{\fs32\insrsid6978166 
\par }{\b\fs32\insrsid12389011\charrsid9462255 A}{\b\fs32\insrsid12389011\charrsid2768103 ppalachian Clearcutters Flunk Siliviculture}{\b\fs32\insrsid12389011 
\par }{\b\insrsid2768103 
\par }{\insrsid2768103\charrsid2768103 by }{\insrsid2768103 R.}{\insrsid1527214  }{\insrsid2768103 F.}{\insrsid1527214  }{\insrsid2768103 Mueller}{\insrsid9256946  }{\insrsid7890035  }{\insrsid2768103 
\par 
\par 
\par \tab To hear the U.S. For
est Service tell it, our primitive Appalachian forests in all their virgin splendor, were really impossibly decadent, scarcely alive. And to hear these bureaucrats, the ancient trees lacked only one ingredient to cure their ills: clearcutting. A simple re
medy!}{\insrsid16012381  }{\insrsid2768103 
\par \tab To get this message across to an initially gullible but increasingly skeptical public, these industrial foresters use a well-honed rhetoric and lexicon of terms }{\insrsid1007033 ranging from euphemistic to scary.}{\insrsid11295225 
 Thus the present forest, with trees far younger than 
those of the primary forest, dating mostly to the turn of the century or later, when it arose from the holocaust of logging and fires, is said to be "aging." This characterization is almost invariably used for 80-90 year old trees }{\insrsid13967353 
in environmental assessments of timber sales despite the Forest Service's own literature }{\insrsid1774173 ( Agricultural Handbook No. 271, USDA Forest Service, 1965 ), which shows }{\insrsid4074004 
that some major tree species add their greatest yearly growth increment at 100 years of age, and that some species live 500 years or more.}{\insrsid6817436 
 Stands of trees 80 years of age are sometimes said to be "falling apart," and one ranger admonished citizens at a public hearing}{\insrsid13967353  }{\insrsid6817436 that "it's a dying forest out there."}{\insrsid3091082 
 Obviously there is no appreciation here for the dead trees and downw}{\insrsid1836364 ood characteristic of }{\insrsid3091082  old growth, traits essential for the health of the forest}{\insrsid10711527 . }{\insrsid12877742 
Such a forest doesn't "age" but exhibits dynamic equilibrium between all ages of tree}{\insrsid1391054 s, including the dead and dying. }{\insrsid11295225 
\par }\pard \ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid11405993 {\insrsid11405993 \tab }{\insrsid5639061 We frequently hear or read that clearcutting is required to revita}{\insrsid11405993 lize "stagnant

\par stands of timber," which then "regenerate" }{\insrsid10837256 as "vigorous" and "thrifty" sprouts.}{\insrsid5405989  The forest
\par is said to be in need of "opening up" or "daylighting," implying that shade intolerant but
\par commercially desirable species such as oaks and Tuliptree could not grow but for the aid
\par of chainsaws and bulldozers.}{\insrsid10034847  To discredit gentler methods}{\insrsid13188786  of logging involving selection
\par }{\insrsid10034847 of trees or groups of trees, they raise the specter that the fo}{\insrsid13188786 rest in the dry oak-rich George
\par }{\insrsid10034847 Washington and Jefferson National Forests might be overrun by shade }{\insrsid13188786 tolerant and
\par }{\insrsid10034847 commercially inferior species such as Beech, Red Maple and Black Gum.}{\insrsid3826910  This argument
\par }{\insrsid5984105 has also been made in the Monongahela National Forest}{\insrsid3826910 , where shade tolerant species
\par }{\insrsid5984105 such as Sugar Maple and Beech are common and where}{\insrsid3826910  oaks are not as common because
\par }{\insrsid5984105 of moist conditions.}{\insrsid1442720  How puzzling then that both shade }{\insrsid3826910 tolerant and intolerant species
\par }{\insrsid1442720 were abundant in the original virgin mixed mesophyte forests of the moist Cumberland}{\insrsid3826910 
\par }{\insrsid1442720 and Allegheny Mountains, while intolerant oaks thrive}{\insrsid3826910  without management elsewhere (
\par }{\insrsid1442720 Lucy Braun, }{\i\insrsid1442720\charrsid12932906 Deciduous Forests of}{\insrsid1442720  }{\i\insrsid1442720\charrsid12932906 Eastern North America,}{\insrsid1442720  Macmillan, 1950 )!}{\insrsid3826910  As
\par }{\insrsid2378647 pointed out by the prominent ecological forester Dr, Leon}{\insrsid3826910  Minckler in numerous
\par }{\insrsid2378647 publications ( e.g. }{\i\insrsid2378647\charrsid12932906 Journal of Forestry, vol. 72}{\insrsid2378647 , 1974 ), the }{\insrsid3826910 large openings of clearcuts are
\par }{\insrsid2378647 not required to generate intolerant species.}{\insrsid8261878  In the old}{\insrsid11484611 -growth primary forest this was
\par }{\insrsid8261878 simply accomplished by tree fall gaps and other disturbanc}{\insrsid11484611 es that generally left openings
\par }{\insrsid8261878 far smaller than clearcuts, or by fire, whose role in most Appalachian forest types }{\insrsid11484611 is still
\par }{\insrsid8261878 not well understood.}{\insrsid5639061 
\par }{\insrsid5844604 \tab }{\insrsid3018001 When we carefully examine clearcut areas, the p}{\insrsid5844604 icture that emerges is quite at
\par }{\insrsid3018001 variance with Forest Service propaganda.}{\insrsid1140171  Since most clea}{\insrsid5844604 rcuts done under Forest Service
\par }{\insrsid1140171 management date back no further than the 1960s, its silviculturalists haven't seen their}{\insrsid5844604 
\par }{\insrsid1140171 handiwork mature.}{\insrsid13725411  However, some private lands have olde}{\insrsid5844604 r cuts of a similar nature, and
\par }{\insrsid13725411 some of these are informative.}{\insrsid2365384  Even for the Forest Service}{\insrsid5844604  the trends are disquieting, as
\par }{\insrsid2365384 reflected in their reports.}{\insrsid1189469  Valuable species such as Northern Red Oak , W}{\insrsid12869099 hite Oak and                   
\par }{\insrsid1189469 Black Oak are frequently replaced by less valuable Sca}{\insrsid12869099 rlet Oak, Black Gum or a plague
\par }{\insrsid1189469 of Red and Striped Maples.}{\insrsid14886454  A striking example is revealed in a 12 April, 1990}{\insrsid1393525  scoping
\par }{\insrsid14886454 notice on Timber Stand Improvement in compartments 1 a}{\insrsid1393525 nd 6 of the Lee Ranger District
\par }{\insrsid14886454 of the George Washington National Forest. Original st}{\insrsid1393525 ands consisting of 45% Northern
\par }{\insrsid14886454 Red and Black Oaks of "good quality" were replaced ( in descending order of ab}{\insrsid1393525 undance
\par }{\insrsid14886454 ) by Red Maple, White Pine ( planted ), Scarlet Oak, }{\insrsid1393525 White Oak, Virginia Pine, and a
\par }{\insrsid14886454 mixture of seven other hardwoods and Virginia Juniper.}{\insrsid1393525  A similar example may be
\par }{\insrsid7042238 observed in a 10 year old clearcut near the popular North River Ca}{\insrsid1393525 mpground of the Dry
\par }{\insrsid7042238 River R.D. in the GWNF. Here the uncut forest su}{\insrsid1393525 rrounding the clearcut consists
\par }{\insrsid7042238 dominantly of upland oaks with little Red Maple. How}{\insrsid1393525 ever, Red Maple has practically
\par }{\insrsid7042238 taken over the clearcut.}{\insrsid3018001 
\par }{\insrsid29428 \tab }{\insrsid3152395 Also, in many areas in which the Forest Service }{\insrsid29428 h}{\insrsid11489216 a}{\insrsid29428 s tried to use clearcutting to
\par }{\insrsid3152395 convert hardwoods on poor sites to pine, this fight agai}{\insrsid29428 nst nature has proved expensive
\par }{\insrsid3152395 and frustrating to the industrial mindset. }{\insrsid2506827 Thus in a 16 May, 1990 letter from the James}{\insrsid29428 
\par }{\insrsid2506827 River Ranger District of the GWNF relative to a "Wh}{\insrsid29428 ite Pine Release" E.A. we read:
\par }{\insrsid2506827 "From experience we can say that the majority of stems }{\insrsid29428 which are overtopping the pines
\par }{\insrsid2506827 are Red Maple, Scarlet Oak and several types of brushy species." In these cases the F}{\insrsid29428 S
\par }{\insrsid2506827 uses herbicides, adding to the general degradation of the watershed.}{\insrsid29428  In a Virginians for
\par }{\insrsid10513060 Wilderness examination of many clearcuts, these appear to be common trends.}{\insrsid29428  Certainly
\par }{\insrsid7217426 this challenges the Forest Service axiom that Red M}{\insrsid29428 aple and other relatively shade
\par }{\insrsid7217426 tolerant species pose a threat only in small selection cuts and clearings.}{\insrsid3152395 
\par }{\insrsid14173135 \tab }{\insrsid15953106 We are told that one advantage of clearcuts is tha}{\insrsid15414908 t they provide numerous sprouts
\par }{\insrsid15953106 which, since they utilize the root systems of the large trees}{\insrsid15414908  they replace, grow faster than
\par }{\insrsid15953106 seedlings, at least initially.}{\insrsid7104573  However, this proliferation of }{\insrsid15414908 sprouts also has disadvantages.
\par }{\insrsid7104573 The sprouts are usually crowded on and around the s}{\insrsid15414908 tumps. The straightest of these
\par }{\insrsid7104573 sprouts are at the center of the clump and usually origina}{\insrsid15414908 te on the stump, sometimes high
\par }{\insrsid7104573 up. However}{\insrsid8783036 , this exposes them to basal rot as the stump underneath rots away.}{\insrsid15414908  Sprouts
\par }{\insrsid10970162 the originate on the roots around the stump are sounder b}{\insrsid15414908 ut tend to be bowed outward and
\par }{\insrsid10970162 so may yield crooked timber. Although vigorous, clearcut spr}{\insrsid15414908 outs may not be thrifty. [
\par }{\insrsid10970162 Another characteristic of sprouts is their genetic identi}{\insrsid15414908 ty to the trees from which they
\par }{\insrsid10970162 originate, so the forests they form have a lower potential f}{\insrsid15414908 or genetic diversity than those
\par }{\insrsid10970162 derived from seeds.]}{\insrsid15616058 .Of course, clearcuts result in numerou}{\insrsid10242758 s sprouts only if the trees cut
\par }{\insrsid15616058 are hardwoods and sufficiently small, since large ha}{\insrsid10242758 rdwoods seldom sprout much, and
\par }{\insrsid15616058 conifers almost never do so.}{\insrsid2521861  Most of the existing clearcuts in the Central Appalachians}{\insrsid10242758 
\par }{\insrsid2521861 were done in very immature stands less than 50 years in ag}{\insrsid10242758 e, hence the sprouting success.
\par }{\insrsid2521861 However, the trees clearcut were by and large derived from seedlings that resulted from }{\insrsid10242758 
\par }{\insrsid3484311 cutting the original primary forest of large trees.}{\insrsid5901490  In view of}{\insrsid10242758  the characteristics of sprouts
\par }{\insrsid5901490 as previously discussed}{\insrsid10893938 , trees being clearcut are probably }{\insrsid10242758 straighter and sounder than
\par }{\insrsid10893938 those now developing from these sprouts in clearcuts.}{\insrsid15616058  }{\insrsid7104573 
\par }{\insrsid3438667 \tab The many small trees cut in clearcuts have r}{\insrsid15415799 esulted in other disadvantages.
\par }{\insrsid3438667 Because most of the nutrients in the tree, exclusive of those in the leaves}{\insrsid15415799 , limbs and roots,
\par }{\insrsid3438667 reside in the inner bark or cambium, and since small trees contain a larger proportion }{\insrsid15415799 of
\par }{\insrsid3438667 cambium than do large ones, their removal depletes t}{\insrsid15415799 he soil disproportionately when
\par }{\insrsid3438667 compared with the removal of large trees.}{\insrsid9269512  It is likely that}{\insrsid15415799  this effect contributes to the
\par }{\insrsid9269512 disproportionate growth in clearcuts of Red Maple and Scarlet Oak}{\insrsid15415799 , species adapted to
\par }{\insrsid8657261 poor soil.}{\insrsid15559228  Also, an analogous process affects the economics of clearcutting.}{\insrsid15415799  This point is
\par }{\insrsid5256563 discussed in Gordon Robinson's book }{\i\insrsid5256563\charrsid12481955 The Forest and the Trees }{\insrsid5256563 ( Island }{\insrsid15415799 Press,1988 ),
\par }{\insrsid5256563 with tables showing that small trees cost considerably more}{\insrsid15415799  to cut, limb, buck, skid, load
\par }{\insrsid5256563 and transport than do large trees.}{\insrsid15415799  This help}{\insrsid1710580 s explain the below cost timber}{\insrsid15415799  sales
\par associated with clearcutting.}{\insrsid11020485 
\par \tab }{\insrsid8932586 Proponents of clearcutting usually say that}{\insrsid11020485  opponents object to the method
\par }{\insrsid8932586 because the results are unsightly and then patronizingly as}{\insrsid11020485 sure them that nature will soon
\par }{\insrsid8932586 heal the scars.}{\insrsid13650793  }{\insrsid9638941 Yet no informed critics of clearcutti}{\insrsid13719832 ng base their criticism on mere
\par }{\insrsid9638941 appearances. To many people, fire scars and blowdowns }{\insrsid13719832 would seem as unsightly as
\par }{\insrsid9638941 clearcuts. However, natural disturbances have few if}{\insrsid13719832  any of the negatives of timber
\par }{\insrsid9638941 extraction. Nutrients are not hauled away with wood products. Compaction of s}{\insrsid13719832 oils and
\par }{\insrsid9638941 destruction of the forest floor  do not occur unless the f}{\insrsid13719832 ire burns very hot-usually as a
\par }{\insrsid9638941 result of human-induced fuel loads.}{\insrsid2174257  Most important, unl}{\insrsid13719832 ess human intervention via fire
\par }{\insrsid2174257 suppression and salvage logging occur, naturally disturbed areas }{\insrsid13719832 have little contact with
\par }{\insrsid4458933 the outside human-modified world.}{\insrsid16207059  Consequently, there ar}{\insrsid13719832 e fewer avenues of entry ( i.e.
\par }{\insrsid16207059 roads ) for alien species-including humans.}{\insrsid7608686  Still, appe}{\insrsid13719832 arances do count for something,
\par }{\insrsid7608686 and the ugliness of clearcuts also indicates their destructiveness.}{\insrsid6443564  Striking examples
\par }{\insrsid4024083 showing gross erosion scars , acres of barren ground, and}{\insrsid6443564  poor regeneration are found in
\par }{\insrsid4024083 the ecologically distinctive }{\insrsid465794 Hidden Valley Spec}{\insrsid6443564 ial Management Area in the Warm
\par }{\insrsid465794 Springs Ranger District of the GWNF.}{\insrsid4010420  Here, on dry, low site index land, }{\insrsid6443564 west of the
\par }{\insrsid4010420 Jackson River, a forest of largely Scarlet, White and }{\insrsid6443564 Chestnut Oak trees less than 10
\par }{\insrsid4010420 inches in diameter was clearcut with disastrous results}{\insrsid6443564 . Bare, sandy eroding soil is
\par }{\insrsid1526605 exposed over wide areas, while regeneration is conf}{\insrsid6443564 ined to widely spaced clumps of
\par }{\insrsid1526605 crowded and inferior sprouts.}{\insrsid10696806  These clearcuts are in gross vi}{\insrsid6443564 olation of the forest plan, and
\par }{\insrsid10696806 were done despite citizen objections. Policies of rape and r}{\insrsid6443564 un clearcutting continue on all
\par }{\insrsid10696806 Appalachian National Forests.}{\insrsid4010420  }{\insrsid4024083 
\par }{\insrsid7874816 \tab }{\insrsid12130998 Here we have confined our discussion larg}{\insrsid7874816 ely to silvicultural effects of
\par }{\insrsid12130998 clearcutting on National Forests. The same arguments ap}{\insrsid7874816 ply to State and private lands,
\par }{\insrsid12130998 except in the case of private lands government subsidies are lacking or smaller.}{\insrsid7874816 
\par }{\insrsid4343437 Unfortunately, clearcutting on state lands, where it i}{\insrsid7874816 s justified as wildlife habitat
\par }{\insrsid4343437 improvement ( as it is on National Forests ), is as yet li}{\insrsid7874816 ttle challenged. We have barely
\par }{\insrsid4343437 touched upon the many negative ecological effects of clearcutting. Many of these }{\insrsid7874816 have
\par }{\insrsid4343437 been documented in our widely distributed flier}{\insrsid16123733  "Clearcuts: Why They're the Worst."}{\insrsid12130998 
\par }{\insrsid7874816 
\par }{\i\insrsid7874816\charrsid406833 \tab This paper is a contribution of Virginians for W}{\i\insrsid406833\charrsid406833 ilderness to Alternative Forest
\par }{\i\insrsid7874816\charrsid406833 Plans for the George Washington, Jefferson, and Monongahela National Forests}{\i\insrsid406833\charrsid406833 . The
\par }{\i\insrsid7874816\charrsid406833 enthusiastic assistance of Mike Jones, Steve Krichbaum }{\i\insrsid406833\charrsid406833 and Gus Mueller is appreciated.
\par }{\i\insrsid7874816\charrsid406833 Virginians for Wilderness can be reached a}{\insrsid7874816 t [}{\i\insrsid7874816\charrsid406833  727 Stingy Hollow Road, Staunton}{\i\insrsid406833\charrsid406833 ,}{\insrsid406833 
\par }{\i\insrsid7874816\charrsid406833 Virginia 24401}{\insrsid406833  ]}{\insrsid7874816 .
\par }{\insrsid4010420\charrsid2768103 
\par }}