{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f36\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f37\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f39\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f40\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f41\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}
{\f42\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f43\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f44\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;
\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden 
Default Paragraph Font;}{\*\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid21608\rsid196619\rsid479929\rsid530956\rsid747064\rsid751977\rsid808104
\rsid861332\rsid866692\rsid922057\rsid986060\rsid1249494\rsid1264068\rsid1274063\rsid1379565\rsid1512593\rsid1580615\rsid1654747\rsid1665597\rsid1708047\rsid2311399\rsid2561725\rsid2572594\rsid2574861\rsid2622085\rsid2774699\rsid2908825\rsid2955854
\rsid3412884\rsid3482895\rsid3499451\rsid3554463\rsid3609635\rsid3673432\rsid3685888\rsid3690069\rsid3809924\rsid3827359\rsid4024171\rsid4084398\rsid4151104\rsid4218210\rsid4533686\rsid4867472\rsid4925982\rsid4941647\rsid4946643\rsid5636885\rsid5774948
\rsid5788059\rsid5838284\rsid5840734\rsid5976524\rsid5977746\rsid6117743\rsid6313742\rsid6367906\rsid6437909\rsid6450732\rsid6518616\rsid6760650\rsid6818268\rsid6975452\rsid7098026\rsid7103030\rsid7106457\rsid7176124\rsid7347584\rsid7628305\rsid7745865
\rsid7894878\rsid8087575\rsid8146608\rsid8475996\rsid8606428\rsid8656677\rsid8674688\rsid8677801\rsid8746948\rsid8802909\rsid8859736\rsid8864447\rsid9046800\rsid9190749\rsid9192519\rsid9395898\rsid9534691\rsid9724372\rsid9767440\rsid9851448\rsid9909419
\rsid9922067\rsid10189923\rsid10314317\rsid10708136\rsid10954281\rsid11012772\rsid11083885\rsid11154091\rsid11172438\rsid11235603\rsid11432155\rsid11490424\rsid11492442\rsid11498650\rsid11534927\rsid11613956\rsid11825264\rsid11948783\rsid12141689
\rsid12148642\rsid12199998\rsid12214468\rsid12274853\rsid12413381\rsid12460715\rsid12483127\rsid12535173\rsid12536262\rsid12588234\rsid12606590\rsid12866320\rsid12914485\rsid13005186\rsid13131764\rsid13308788\rsid13659591\rsid13765823\rsid13785655
\rsid13984920\rsid14024914\rsid14106883\rsid14115856\rsid14120670\rsid14122693\rsid14167273\rsid14251667\rsid14378564\rsid14427998\rsid14496377\rsid14514207\rsid14570497\rsid14626393\rsid14641472\rsid14752675\rsid14828320\rsid15032389\rsid15167765
\rsid15352648\rsid15676894\rsid15731669\rsid15755733\rsid15861290\rsid15870389\rsid16000900\rsid16060525\rsid16198929\rsid16337588\rsid16415047\rsid16527590\rsid16534415\rsid16718708}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 10.0.2627;}{\info
{\title Geology in Reserve Design}{\author Hoagie}{\operator Hoagie}{\creatim\yr2006\mo11\dy23\hr14\min50}{\revtim\yr2006\mo12\dy14\hr13\min51}{\version150}{\edmins3290}{\nofpages7}{\nofwords3052}{\nofchars17403}{\nofcharsws20415}{\vern16437}}
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\hyphcaps0\formshade\horzdoc\dgmargin\dghspace180\dgvspace180\dghorigin1701\dgvorigin1984\dghshow1\dgvshow1
\jexpand\viewkind4\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\splytwnine\ftnlytwnine\htmautsp\nolnhtadjtbl\useltbaln\alntblind\lytcalctblwd\lyttblrtgr\lnbrkrule\nobrkwrptbl\snaptogridincell\allowfieldendsel\wrppunct\asianbrkrule\rsidroot11613956 \fet0\sectd 
\linex0\endnhere\sectlinegrid360\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}
{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain 
\qc \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid11613956 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\b\insrsid196619\charrsid9767440 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid196619 {\b\insrsid9767440\charrsid9767440 The following article }{\b\insrsid9767440 was first published in }{\b\i\insrsid9767440\charrsid9767440 Wild Earth}{
\b\i\insrsid12413381 , Vol. 7}{\b\i\insrsid7745865 ,}{\b\i\insrsid12413381  #2, pp 62-66, }{\b\insrsid9724372 1997}{\b\insrsid5976524 .}{\b\insrsid1264068  Some corrections and additional information, usually in brackets, have been introduced in}{
\b\insrsid5976524 to}{\b\insrsid1264068  the text.}{\b\insrsid9767440\charrsid9724372 
\par }{\b\fs32\insrsid9767440 
\par }{\b\fs32\insrsid196619\charrsid6117743 Geology in Reserve Design,
\par An Example from the Folded Appalachians
\par }{\b\fs28\insrsid196619 
\par }{\i\insrsid196619\charrsid196619 by R. F. Mueller and Gus Mueller}{\i\insrsid196619 
\par 
\par }{\b\insrsid196619\charrsid751977 Abstract
\par }{\b\insrsid13785655\charrsid751977 \tab A strong relation exists between bedrock geology, forest type, and land use on Warm Springs Mountain in Virginia and by extension in other parts
 of the folded Appalachians. These relations have important implications in the design of wildland reserves in t}{\b\insrsid12606590 he region. M}{\b\insrsid13785655\charrsid751977 ost }{\b\i\insrsid13785655\charrsid12914485 de facto}{
\b\insrsid13785655\charrsid751977  wildlands that are potential reserves are public land, which is a consequence of low biologic productivity assoc}{\b\insrsid1654747 iated with refractory bedrock. H}{\b\insrsid13785655\charrsid751977 
owever, more productive rocks, such as carbonates ( limestones, dolomites, a}{\b\insrsid3499451\charrsid751977 
nd some sandstones and shales ), frequently occur on adjacent private lands or as enclaves within public lands. The tracts on which these productive rocks 
occur should be targeted for protection and restoration as vital complementary parts of the reserves. Geology has an important role in the identification and characterization of this diverse terrain and should be an integral part of reserve planning.}{
\b\insrsid13785655\charrsid751977 
\par }{\insrsid14514207 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs28\insrsid14514207\charrsid14514207 INTRODUCTION}{\b\fs28\insrsid14514207 
\par }{\b\fs28\insrsid14106883 \tab }{\insrsid747064\charrsid747064 The establishment}{\insrsid747064  of}{\insrsid751977  }{\insrsid13659591 
wildlands reserves in the Appalachian Mountains requires an appreciation of the ecological functions of the array of forest types and other biologic communities of the region. The varied forest types and plant communities
 result in part from and interact with enveloping physical systems: rock type and structure, topography, climate, soils, etc. They are an example of the functional landscape mosaic listed by Noss ( 1995/96 ) as necessary to reserve viability.}{
\insrsid14106883 
\par }{\insrsid6450732 \tab Soils are usually regarded as the most fundamental interface between biologic systems }{\insrsid6367906 and the physical environment.}{\insrsid13308788 
 While this is in a sense true, soils are difficult to work with in the field and represent on maps because they show so much small-scale variation in response to local topography and even recent history of human disturbance.}{\insrsid1512593 
 Geologic rock units have an advantage over soil units in that their boundaries may be more easily projected and interpolated.}{\insrsid14378564  This is especially true of the folded Appalachians where 
many rock unit boundaries tend to be linear along fixed trends.}{\insrsid2774699  Also, in colluvial deposits detached rocks may be more easily identified than soils and traced to their points of orig}{\insrsid11083885 in.}{\insrsid5636885 
 This relative ease of identification extends to mineral specimens, using no more than a hand lens ( for texture ), a knife blade ( for hardness ), and an acid bottle ( to test for carbonate ). By contrast, soil characterization usually requires lab work.
}{\insrsid2311399  These advantages are particularly important to activists who have little time and few resources.}{\insrsid4533686 
 For these reasons we deem bedrock geology a more practical indicator of major regional variations in forest type, and one of our objectives here is to demonstrate the value of geology in regional ecological mapping. Nothing in the
 foregoing, however, should be seen as diminishing the role of soils. The characteristic of variation in response to local conditions that makes it difficult to map soils is at the same time useful in the interpretation of microhabitats that determine pre
cise locations of species. For example, soil depth and type over limestone }{\insrsid9046800 governs where alkali or acid-favored species occur. Thus, over limestone bedrock, Chinquapin Oak (}{\i\insrsid9046800\charrsid12536262  Quercus muehlenbergii}{
\insrsid9046800  ), which demands high pH, is favored by shallow soils, while Red Maple ( }{\i\insrsid9046800\charrsid12536262 Acer rubrum }{\insrsid9046800 ), an acid-lover, requires deep and leached soils.}{\insrsid3685888 
 Of course, forests also vary in response to such factors as elevation, slope and aspect, which may be independent of geology or show their effects within geologic formations; and in
deed these factors have received attention in the region in the past ( e.g.}{\insrsid6313742 
 Stephenson and Adams 1991 ). Although the writers know of few specific studies of the relation between forests and geology in the Central Appalachians, this relation is referred to
 frequently in a general way by Braun ( 1950) and is implicit in recent works on certain plant distributions. Thus Ogle ( 1989 ) discussed the distribution of rare and disjunct plants which occur on certain Ordovician dolomites.}{\insrsid8475996 
 Also, the relation is well recognized by the Virginia Natural Heritage Program  ( Ludwig }{\i\insrsid8475996\charrsid8475996 et al}{\insrsid8475996  1994 ), which has used it in inventories of rare species and unusual communities.}{
\insrsid6450732\charrsid747064 
\par }{\insrsid196619 \tab }{\insrsid2908825 Many of the ranges of the folded Appalachians have an asymmetry with respect to rock type exposure.}{\super\insrsid2908825 1 }{\insrsid2908825 
Frequently one side of a range and the summit consists of erosion-resistant and nutrient-poor sandstone or quartzite}{\insrsid11825264 , while the other side is dominated by limestone, dolomite shale or siltstone in various proportions.}{\insrsid1379565 
 Usually carbonate and/or shale also form the floors of the narrow valleys that separate the ranges.}{\insrsid14641472  The northeast-southwest linear extension of the ranges form fairly extensive }{\i\insrsid14641472\charrsid3554463 de facto}{
\insrsid14641472  wildland corridors in this direction.}{\insrsid3554463  However habitat continuity in the cross-range direction is frequently 
interrupted by agricultural development not only in the valleys but also on mid-slopes. Forest types developed on the refractory sandstones and quartzite have important functions as remote habitat, excellent cover ( e.g. laurel thickets ), and sources of 
certain important forage such as acorns.}{\insrsid12274853  However, they are also limited by lack of forage and habitat diversity and productivity. Far different were the original forests }{\insrsid8864447 
that occupied the mid-slope and valley bottoms on the highly productive soils associated with carbonate rocks.}{\insrsid12535173 
 These forests consisted not only of a high, complexly structured and diverse mesic canopy, but also a multitude of fruiting and tuber-producing plants, fungi, and resident fauna that provided abundant foraging opportunities for anim
al life with access to them.}{\insrsid16198929  The areas once occupied by these forests, but which now possess them only in degraded form if at all, are thus priority targets for }{\insrsid14427998 ecosystem recovery.}{\insrsid196619 
\par }{\b\fs28\insrsid15861290\charrsid15861290 
\par WARMS SPRINGS MOUNTAIN}{\b\fs28\insrsid15861290 
\par }{\b\fs28\insrsid6760650 
\par }{\fs28\insrsid6760650\charrsid6760650 \tab }{\insrsid6760650 Warm Springs Mountain extends 28 miles ( 45 km ) northeast from Covington}{\insrsid5838284 , V}{\insrsid6760650 irginia.}{\insrsid6760650\charrsid6760650  }{\insrsid3482895 
Like a number of similar}{\insrsid7628305  ranges}{\insrsid3482895 
 in this part of the folded Appalachians, it averages about three miles ( 5 km ) in width and is capped by erosion-resistant Silurian sandstone and quartzite. It attains 4000 feet ( 1220 me
ters ) elevation in several places, with Bald Knob at 4225 ft ( 1288 meters ) being the highest. In terms of geologic structure it is part of an anticlinal fold  ( folded layers form an upward pointing crest ), but this anticline has been breached by eros
ion over much of its length, exposing older Ordovician rocks that form its core ( Figure 1 )}{\insrsid1249494 
. The central and oldest of these rocks are limestones and dolomites of the Beekmantown Group and the Moccasin Formation, which underlie the Warm Springs Valley just
 northwest of the range. Slightly younger carbonate-bearing shales of the Martinsburg Formation form the northwest slope, and these are overlain by shales, siltstones and sandstones of the Juniata Formation. }{\insrsid2574861 
The Juniata is in turn overlain by the Silurian Clinch quartzite of the summit.}{\insrsid6760650 
\par }{\insrsid4946643 \tab A feature of Figure 1 that needs to be clarified is the apparent absence of Silurian rock on the northwest limb of the anticline. }{\insrsid8746948 
This is a consequence of a failure to distinguish the Silurian from lower Devonian in this area as well as the relative thinness of the Silurian ( Rader and Evans 1993 ).}{\insrsid4946643 
\par }{\insrsid15352648 \tab If the pattern of land ownership ( Figure 2 ) is compared with the distribution of rock types, it appears that correspondence is quite good. }{\insrsid6818268 Public land, and particularly Nation
al Forest, is largely confined to areas underlain by Silurian rocks of low productivity, while limestone and carbonate areas are predominantly in private hands.}{\insrsid866692 
 Where the areas of Silurian age are expanded southwest and northeast of the Ordovician belt ( points }{\insrsid12460715 
A and B of Figure 2 ), the anticline is not breached and the forest cover is similar to that which occurs on the southeast limb  ( points C, D and E of Figure 2 ). It should also be noted that in the vicinity of point B the Silurian rocks of the anti
cline plunge beneath the Devonian as a result of cross deformation.}{\insrsid3827359  Everywhere on the uplands this forest is dry and ericaceous, consisting dominantly of Chestnut Oak ( }{\i\insrsid3827359\charrsid9192519 Quercus prinus }{
\insrsid3827359 ) with lesser amounts of White}{\insrsid2561725  ( }{\i\insrsid2561725\charrsid9192519 Q. alba }{\insrsid2561725 ), Northern Red ( }{\i\insrsid2561725\charrsid9192519 Q. rubra}{\insrsid2561725  ), Black ( }{
\i\insrsid9192519\charrsid9192519 Q. velutina }{\insrsid9192519 ) and Scarlet Oak ( }{\i\insrsid9192519\charrsid9192519 Q. coccinea}{\insrsid9192519  ), Red Maple ( }{\i\insrsid9192519\charrsid9192519 Acer rubrum}{\insrsid9192519  ) and Black Gum ( }{
\i\insrsid9192519\charrsid9192519 Nyssa sylvatica }{\insrsid9192519 ).}{\insrsid15352648  }{\insrsid11490424 The shrub layer consists largely of Mountain Laurel ( }{\i\insrsid11490424\charrsid2955854 Kalmia latifolia}{\insrsid11490424 
 ), Upland Low Blueberry ( }{\i\insrsid11490424\charrsid2955854 Vaccinium pallidum}{\insrsid11490424  ) and Black Huckleberry (}{\i\insrsid11490424\charrsid2955854  Gaylussacia baccata }{\insrsid11490424 
). The leaf mat is heavy and ground cover is usually confined to scattered small heaths such as Teaberry ( }{\i\insrsid11490424\charrsid2955854 Gaultheria procumbens}{\insrsid11490424  )}{\insrsid2572594  and Trailing Arbutus ( }{
\i\insrsid2572594\charrsid2955854 Epigaea repens }{\insrsid2572594 ) and herbs such as Wood Tickseed ( }{\i\insrsid2572594\charrsid2955854 C}{\i\insrsid6975452\charrsid2955854 o}{\i\insrsid2572594\charrsid2955854 reopsis major}{\insrsid2572594  )}{
\insrsid6975452 . }{\i\insrsid6975452\charrsid2955854 Leucobryum}{\insrsid6975452  cusion moss and }{\i\insrsid6975452\charrsid2955854 Cladina}{\insrsid6975452  lichen are common at tree bases and on patches of open ground.}{\insrsid15352648 
\par }{\insrsid7106457 \tab Examples of [ at ] least one other forest type occur at lower elevations on the silica-rich Silurian rocks.}{\insrsid11948783  These are the mesic forests along streams and in well-watered coves.}{\insrsid11492442  L}{
\insrsid16527590 
ike those of the upland forests, soils are acid, as reflected in both woody vegetation and herbs. The most imposing example is Dolly Ann Hollow ( point E, Figure 2 ). The canopy here is dominated by large old-growth Canada ( or Eastern ) Hemlock ( }{
\i\insrsid16527590\charrsid861332 Tsuga canadensis }{\insrsid16527590 ), White Pine ( }{\i\insrsid16527590\charrsid861332 Pinus strobus }{\insrsid16527590 ), White and Chestnut Oaks and Pignut Hickory ( }{\i\insrsid16527590\charrsid861332 Carya glabra }{
\insrsid16527590 ), with smaller sized Black Gum, Northern red Oak, Tuliptree ( }{\i\insrsid16527590\charrsid861332 Liriodendron tulipifera}{\insrsid16527590  ), American Basswood ( }{\i\insrsid16527590\charrsid861332 Tilia americana }{\insrsid16527590 )}
{\insrsid6518616  and Shagbark Hickory ( }{\i\insrsid6518616\charrsid861332 Carya ovata}{\insrsid6518616  ). Witch Hazel}{\insrsid16534415  ( }{\i\insrsid16534415\charrsid861332 Hamamelis viginiana}{\insrsid16534415 
 ), and especially Great Rhododendron ( }{\i\insrsid16534415\charrsid861332 Rhododendron maximum}{\insrsid16534415  ), form thickets along the stream. }{\insrsid8859736 
The acid and nutrient-poor near-surface soil layers result in sparse herbaceous ground cover and its limitation to a few species such as Partridge Berry ( }{\i\insrsid8859736\charrsid3690069 Mitchella repens }{\insrsid8859736 
). Similar "acid-mesic" forests also oc}{\insrsid3673432 cur in coves near location A ( F}{\insrsid8859736 igure 2 )}{\insrsid3673432 , but here contain such species as Striped Maple ( }{\i\insrsid3673432\charrsid3690069 Acer pensylvanicum }{
\insrsid3673432 ), Canada Mayflower ( }{\i\insrsid3673432\charrsid3690069 Maianthemum canadense }{\insrsid3673432 ) and Starflower [ }{\i\insrsid3673432\charrsid3690069 Trientalis borealis }{\insrsid3673432 
] in response to somewhat higher elevations than at Dolly Ann Hollow. Our point here is that despite abundant moisture in the acid-mesic forests, they differ greatly from the mesic forests on rich or circumneutral soils.}{\insrsid7106457 
\par }{\insrsid530956 \tab If we now consider the forests developed on carbonate rocks of the Ordovician formations, we see stark differences }{\insrsid12148642 delineated by geologic boundaries.}{\insrsid9909419 
 The richest soils and those most utilized for agriculture, occur on the limestone and dolomite rocks of the Warm Springs Valley along US Route 220 ( Figures 1 and 3 ). }{\insrsid4151104 
Forests here are diverse, with many mesic species such as maples, elms, ashes a
nd Tuliptree: yet they also contain many oaks, due to the ready subsurface drainage of limestone bedrock and the consequent drying of soils during periods of drought.  Indeed, this valley is a notable karst area with many sinkholes and caves ( Hubbard 198
8 ).
\par }{\insrsid13131764 \tab Of greater interest to us than the valley limestones is the Martinsburg Formation because it underlies areas nearer the Silurian rocks and }{\insrsid2622085 
public lands. This formation consists of predominantly "yellow to brown weathering limy shale" with a thickness 
of about 1000 feet ( 300 meters ). The overlying Juniata formation of 300 to 400 feet ( 90-120 meters ) in thickness forms a narrow transitional zone between carbonate rocks and the Silurian sandstones ( Bick 1962 ). Both of these formations are included 
under "Ordovician Shale" in Figure 1.}{\insrsid13131764 
\par }{\insrsid922057 \tab One of the most striking-and accessible-transformations in forest type associated with the contact between two rock units }{\insrsid14496377 
occurs in the high gap by which State Route 39 crosses the range just east of Warm Springs, VA. Here ( point F, Figure 2 ), after passing through oak forest on the southeast slope, is an abrupt change in vegetation at the gap.}{\insrsid5977746 
 At almost 3000 ft ( 914 meters ) elevation Black Walnut ( }{\i\insrsid5977746\charrsid3609635 Juglans nigra }{\insrsid5977746 ) and other mesic species, including particularly many grape vines ( }{\i\insrsid5977746\charrsid3609635 Vitis aestivalis}{
\insrsid5977746  ), suddenly appear.}{\insrsid1274063  Othe mesic species encountered on descent of the northwest slope are Slippery Elm ( }{\i\insrsid1274063\charrsid3609635 Ulmus fulva }{\insrsid1274063 )}{\insrsid14120670 
, Northern Red and White Oaks, Black Birch ( }{\i\insrsid14120670\charrsid3609635 Betula lenta }{\insrsid14120670 ), Shagbark, Bitternut and Pignut Hickories ( }{\i\insrsid14120670\charrsid3609635 Carya ovata, C. cordiformis}{\i\insrsid3609635  }{
\insrsid3609635\charrsid3609635 and}{\i\insrsid14120670\charrsid3609635  C. glabra }{\insrsid14120670 ), Butternut ( }{\i\insrsid14120670\charrsid3609635 Juglans cinerea}{\insrsid14120670  ), Cucumber Magnolia ( }{\i\insrsid14120670\charrsid3609635 Mag}{
\i\insrsid1580615\charrsid3609635 nolia acuminata}{\insrsid1580615  ), White Ash ( }{\i\insrsid1580615\charrsid3609635 F}{\i\insrsid14120670\charrsid3609635 raxinus americana}{\insrsid14120670  )}{\insrsid1580615 , White Basswood ( }{
\i\insrsid1580615\charrsid3609635 Tilia heterophylla}{\insrsid1580615  ), Black Cherry ( }{\i\insrsid1580615\charrsid3609635 Prunus serotina}{\insrsid1580615  ), Black Lo}{\insrsid3609635 cust ( }{\i\insrsid3609635\charrsid3609635 Robinia pseud}{
\i\insrsid1580615\charrsid3609635 oacacia }{\insrsid1580615 ), Red, Sugar and Black Maples ( }{\i\insrsid1580615\charrsid3609635 Acer rubrum, A.}{\insrsid1580615  }{\i\insrsid1580615\charrsid3609635 saccharum}{\insrsid1580615  and}{
\i\insrsid1580615\charrsid3609635  A. nigrum }{\insrsid1580615 ) and Red Mulberry ( }{\insrsid14626393 M}{\i\insrsid14626393\charrsid3609635 orus rubra}{\insrsid14626393  ).}{\insrsid14167273  Shrubs include Black Elderberry (}{
\i\insrsid14167273\charrsid7894878  Sambucus canadensis}{\insrsid14167273  ), Witch Hazel, maple Leaf Viburnum ( }{\i\insrsid14167273\charrsid7894878 Viburnum acerifolium }{\insrsid14167273 ) and Flowering Raspberry ( }{\i\insrsid14167273\charrsid7894878 
Rubus odoratus }{\insrsid14167273 ). Black Maple in particular is considered to be an indicator of the richest ( eutrophic ) forest type in the state ( Rawinski 1994 ). Martinsburg Shales are conspicuous in road cuts on the slope.}{\insrsid922057 
\par }{\insrsid7894878 \tab A similar transition of forest types may also be observed in the southern part of the range along State Rout 606. This road ascends the northwest slope obliquely  toward a broad wind gap at the range crest.}{\insrsid8087575 
 The aspect here varies from west to southwest, but the forest is mesic.}{\insrsid1708047  Approximately 2 miles ( 3}{\insrsid4024171 .2 km ) southeast of Route 220 (}{\insrsid1708047 
 point G, Figure 2 ) typical Martinsburg Shale is exposed in a road cut beneath dark brown mull type soil which is characteristic of mixed mesophyte forest.}{\insrsid13005186  Although this forest is secondary and has suffered obvious d
egradation, its original character is iden}{\insrsid986060 t}{\insrsid13005186 ifiable. The canopy is dominated by White Ash with subordinate Sugar Maple, Blac}{\insrsid3809924 k Locust and a little Northern R}{\insrsid13005186 
ed Oak, the most mesic of oaks.}{\insrsid1665597  As}{\insrsid5774948  }{\insrsid1665597 is characteristic of such mesic forest, there is virtually no leaf
 mat. It appears that the water retaining properties and fertility of the limy shale are, despite the unfavorable aspect, adequate to maintain mesic conditions throughout the year , enabling the observed species to out-compete such oaks as appear on the v
alley limestones.}{\insrsid4084398  The mesic character of the forest is maintained to the mountain crest.}{\insrsid5774948  A}{\insrsid6437909 t this point Route 606 meets Route 703, which follows the ridge to the northeast.}{\insrsid7176124 
 The transition from mesic to dry oak forest}{\insrsid5774948  occurs in }{\insrsid7176124 
 0.3 mile ( 0.5 km ) along this road, where it climbs out of he gap and encounters resistant sandstone. The forest here, and extending along the ridge, consists of Chestnut, White and Northern Red Oaks and considerable Red Maple. Mountain Laurel is common
 in the shrub layer.}{\insrsid5840734  }{\insrsid7894878 
\par }{\insrsid16000900 \tab 
Above approximately 3500 feet ( 1070 meters ) this oak forest itself undergoes a transition to predominantly Northern Red Oak, as is usual for higher elevations in the region ( Mueller 1996 ). On the exposed culmination of the ridge a
t Bald Knob, the oak forest bec}{\insrsid11235603 o}{\insrsid16000900 mes stunted and wind contorted. }{\insrsid7103030 On the most exposed slopes it gives way to Pitch Pine ( }{\i\insrsid7103030\charrsid11235603 Pinus rigida}{\insrsid7103030 
 ) heath with shrubby Bear Oak (}{\i\insrsid7103030\charrsid11235603  Quercus ilicifolia}{\insrsid7103030  ), Catawba Rhododendron}{\insrsid16000900  }{\insrsid7103030 ( }{\i\insrsid7103030\charrsid11235603 Rhododendron catawbiense}{\insrsid7103030 
 ), Minnie-bush ( }{\i\insrsid3412884\charrsid11235603 Menziesia pilosa}{\insrsid3412884  ), Black Chokeberry ( }{\i\insrsid3412884\charrsid11235603 Aronia melanocarpa}{\insrsid3412884 
 ), huckleberry and blueberries. Accompanying these are such boreal species }{\insrsid11432155 as }{\insrsid3412884 American Mountain Ash ( }{\i\insrsid3412884\charrsid11235603 Pyrus americana }{\insrsid3412884 )}{\insrsid14251667 
, Canada Mayflower, and the rare Variable Sedge ( }{\i\insrsid14251667\charrsid11235603 Carex polymorpha }{\insrsid14251667 ).}{\insrsid16000900 
\par }{\insrsid4867472 
\par }{\fs28\insrsid10189923\charrsid7347584 
\par }{\b\fs28\insrsid10189923\charrsid7347584 CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS}{\b\fs28\insrsid10189923 
\par }{\b\fs28\insrsid4867472 
\par }{\b\insrsid16337588 \tab }{\insrsid16337588\charrsid16337588 Close correspondence }{\insrsid16337588 appears to exist between the geology and forest type on Warm Springs Mountain, a fairly typical range of the folded Appalachi}{\insrsid7098026 an}{
\insrsid16337588 s.}{\insrsid7098026  This correspondence includes not only the obvious contrast between valley bottom and ridge top, but also the slope formations.}{\insrsid9922067 
 In at least some situations the effect of bedrock dominates that of aspect and other slope factors and may be the primary determinant of forest type distributions.}{\insrsid8674688  Although the present study was confi
ned to Warm Springs Mountain, a perusal }{\insrsid13984920 of geologic, land use and forest cover maps, as well as cursory field observation, indicates that similar relations probably occur on many ranges of the folded Appalachians.}{\insrsid14024914 
 Specific examples include Peters, Clinch and Walker Mountains in southwest Virginia and ranges to the north and northwest of Warm Springs Mountain. }{\insrsid11154091 
To varying degrees, such relations should occur in unglaciated terrain quite generally, and even in glaciated terrain where bedrock is near the surface.}{\insrsid15167765 
 Correlations between fluvial and glacial deposits and forest type have also been recognized, an example being }{\insrsid12866320 the association of Jack Pine ( }{\i\insrsid12866320\charrsid9534691 Pinus banksiana}{\insrsid12866320 
 ) and glacial outwash ( Braun 1950 ). Relations between fluvial deposits and forest type in the unglaciated Appalachians should be investigated.}{\insrsid16337588 
\par }{\insrsid10708136 \tab This study indicates that geologic formation delineation and trend lines can facilitate ecological mapping. Relations between geologic formation, topography and forest type should also enhance the value of 
aerial photographs and aid field work.}{\insrsid4941647 
 The use of geology thus provides several converging avenues to ecosystem protection and recovery. Although state Natural Heritage programs give most attention to rare species and ecosystems, integration of geology int
o these programs can help realize the potential of degraded but critical areas in the regional ecologic mosaic. }{\insrsid12214468 
In the absence of geologic information, recognition of such areas and their ecological functions will be more difficult. Consequently, we urge t
hat geologic mapping and formation characterization be incorporated in evaluating ecosystems on a scale much larger than its present incidental use as a guide to certain rare occurrences.}{\insrsid10708136 
\par }{\insrsid15032389 \tab Geological data and concepts should be integrated into wildland pla
nning by activists. An additional benefit of such planning could be the involvement of a larger segment of the scientific community. Many geologists might be surprised to learn that they can make significant contributions to preserving and restoring biodi
versity through their knowledge of rock distributions and mineral chemistry. Scientists are ever on the lookout to expand their activities into new fields. Unfortunately, to the present most geologists have been single-mindedly }{\insrsid15755733 
concerned with the exploitation of Nature. This could be changed by revealing to them the role in wildland research and preservation.}{\insrsid15032389 
\par }{\insrsid12199998 
\par }{\i\insrsid12199998\charrsid16718708 Gus Mueller is an artist and writer with an interest in Nature and technology. Bob }{\i\insrsid15870389 \tab }{\i\insrsid12199998\charrsid16718708 Mueller, a retired}{\i\insrsid16718708\charrsid16718708  }{
\insrsid16718708\charrsid16718708 [}{\i\insrsid16718708\charrsid16718708  }{\insrsid16718708\charrsid808104 NASA }{\insrsid16718708\charrsid16718708 ]}{\i\insrsid16718708\charrsid16718708  scientist, is coordinator of Virginians for Wilderness  }{
\i\insrsid15870389 \tab }{\i\insrsid808104 ( }{\i\insrsid16718708\charrsid16718708 Rt.1 Box 250 }{\insrsid16718708\charrsid16718708 [ now}{\i\insrsid16718708\charrsid16718708  }{\insrsid16718708\charrsid16718708 727 Stingy Hollow Road}{
\i\insrsid16718708\charrsid16718708  }{\insrsid16718708\charrsid16718708 ]}{\i\insrsid16718708\charrsid16718708 , Staunton, Virginia 24401).}{\i\insrsid12199998\charrsid16718708 
\par }{\insrsid4218210 
\par }{\b\insrsid4218210\charrsid4218210 
\par }{\b\fs28\insrsid8146608 
\par Acknowledgement}{\b\insrsid8146608 
\par }{\insrsid8146608\charrsid8802909 \tab The writers appreciate the assistance in the field of Steve Krichbaum and Mike Jones . We also appreciate the generous support provided by Humani-tees and The Fund for Wild Nature.
\par }{\b\fs28\insrsid8146608 
\par References
\par }{\b\fs28\insrsid21608 
\par }{\b\insrsid21608\charrsid21608 Bick, Kenneth F.}{\b\insrsid21608  ( 1962 )}{\b\i\insrsid21608\charrsid15731669  Geology of the Williamsville Quadrangle}{\b\i\insrsid15731669\charrsid15731669 , Virginia. Report }{\b\insrsid15731669 \tab }{
\b\i\insrsid15731669\charrsid15731669 of Investigations 2}{\b\insrsid11012772 . Virginia Division of M}{\b\insrsid15731669 ineral Resources, Charlottesville, \tab Virginia.}{\b\insrsid21608 
\par }{\b\insrsid8677801 Braun, E. Lucy ( 1950 ) }{\b\i\insrsid8677801\charrsid8677801 Deciduous Forests of Eastern North America}{\b\insrsid8677801 . Macmillan, \tab New York.
\par }{\b\insrsid479929 Hubbard, David A. Jr. ( 1988 )}{\b\i\insrsid479929\charrsid5788059  Selected Karst Features of the Central Valley and }{\b\i\insrsid5788059 \tab }{\b\i\insrsid479929\charrsid5788059 Ridge Province, Virginia.}{\b\insrsid479929 
 Virginia Division of Mineral Resources, Publication }{\b\insrsid5788059 \tab }{\b\insrsid479929 83.
\par }{\b\insrsid10314317 Ludwig, J. Christopher}{\b\insrsid16415047 , Allen Belden and Christopher A. Clampitt ( 1994 ) }{\b\i\insrsid16415047\charrsid9395898 A }{\b\i\insrsid9395898 \tab }{\b\i\insrsid16415047\charrsid9395898 
Natural Heritage Inventory of the Clinch Ranger District}{\b\insrsid9395898 ,}{\b\insrsid16415047  Jefferson National }{\b\insrsid9395898 \tab }{\b\insrsid16415047 Forest}{\b\insrsid9395898 
 Technical Report # 94-2. Virginia Department of Conservation and \tab Recreation , Division of Natural Heritage.}{\b\insrsid10314317 
\par }{\b\insrsid11172438 Mueller, Robert F. ( 1996 ) "Central Appalachian Plant Distributions and Forest \tab Types, or what a walk in the woods can tell you." }{\b\i\insrsid11172438\charrsid11172438 Wild Earth 6}{\b\insrsid11172438  (1), 37-43.
\par }{\b\insrsid11498650 Noss, Reed F. ( 1995/96 ) "What Should Endangered Ecosystems Mean to the }{\b\insrsid14570497 \tab }{\b\insrsid11498650 Wildlands Project?" }{\b\i\insrsid11498650\charrsid10954281 Wild Earth 5}{\b\insrsid11498650  (4), 20-29.
\par }{\b\insrsid9851448 Ogle, Douglas W. ( 1989 ) "Rare Vascular Plants of the Clinch River Gorge Area in \tab Russell County, Virginia," }{\b\i\insrsid9851448\charrsid9851448 Castanea 53 }{\b\insrsid14752675 (}{\b\insrsid9851448 2)}{\b\insrsid14115856 ,}{
\b\insrsid9851448  105-110.
\par }{\b\insrsid14828320 Rader, E. K. }{\b\insrsid11534927 and N. H. Evans, editors ( 1993 )}{\b\i\insrsid11534927\charrsid13765823  Geologic Map of Virginia-Expanded }{\b\insrsid13765823 \tab }{\b\i\insrsid11534927\charrsid13765823 Explanation. }{
\b\insrsid11534927 Virginia Division of Mineral Resources, 80 pp.}{\b\insrsid9851448 
\par }{\b\insrsid15676894 Rawinski, Thomas J.  ( 1994 ) }{\b\i\insrsid15676894\charrsid12141689 A Classification of Virginia's Indigenous Biotic}{\b\insrsid15676894  }{\b\insrsid12141689 \tab }{\b\i\insrsid15676894\charrsid12141689 
Communities: Vegetated Terrestrial and Estuarine Community Classes, }{\b\i\insrsid12141689 \tab }{\b\i\insrsid15676894\charrsid12141689 Technical Report # 92-21.}{\b\insrsid15676894  Virginia Department of Conservation and }{\b\insrsid12141689 \tab }{
\b\insrsid15676894 Recreation, Division of Natural Heritage.
\par }{\b\insrsid9190749 Stephenson, Steve L. and Harold S. Adams ( 1991 ) "Upland Oak Forests of the }{\b\insrsid14122693 \tab }{\b\insrsid9190749 Ridge and Valley Province in Southwestern Virginia." }{\b\i\insrsid9190749\charrsid9190749 Virginia Journal of }
{\b\i\insrsid14122693 \tab }{\b\i\insrsid9190749\charrsid9190749 Science 42}{\b\insrsid9190749  (4)}{\b\insrsid8656677 ,}{\b\insrsid9190749  371-380.}{\b\insrsid9190749\charrsid21608 
\par }}