{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f36\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f37\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f39\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f40\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f41\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}
{\f42\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f43\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f44\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;
\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden 
Default Paragraph Font;}{\*\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid9549\rsid27338\rsid28634\rsid87196\rsid87449\rsid139036\rsid200966
\rsid274320\rsid424161\rsid524462\rsid599741\rsid656553\rsid685129\rsid720947\rsid736103\rsid860424\rsid873479\rsid880690\rsid1053411\rsid1058737\rsid1078443\rsid1117146\rsid1206042\rsid1250763\rsid1254251\rsid1270617\rsid1377051\rsid1404446\rsid1448180
\rsid1641155\rsid1645027\rsid1653490\rsid1717866\rsid1837858\rsid1839275\rsid1855757\rsid1910836\rsid2034775\rsid2057762\rsid2112770\rsid2125801\rsid2168589\rsid2260612\rsid2323766\rsid2360722\rsid2368685\rsid2370881\rsid2389917\rsid2390042\rsid2438696
\rsid2455054\rsid2493746\rsid2560360\rsid2573231\rsid2575875\rsid2647388\rsid2754359\rsid2766131\rsid2844712\rsid2850348\rsid2903308\rsid2907238\rsid3094870\rsid3102701\rsid3109485\rsid3146587\rsid3167955\rsid3226636\rsid3361628\rsid3362881\rsid3409829
\rsid3475077\rsid3485893\rsid3553573\rsid3675601\rsid3697484\rsid3830167\rsid3884384\rsid3894016\rsid4007874\rsid4009843\rsid4025384\rsid4025442\rsid4080161\rsid4083094\rsid4087711\rsid4132969\rsid4152293\rsid4208028\rsid4216938\rsid4217126\rsid4220791
\rsid4222562\rsid4327938\rsid4330085\rsid4354004\rsid4402905\rsid4457061\rsid4462200\rsid4552226\rsid4599540\rsid4658681\rsid4723762\rsid4745582\rsid4785859\rsid4814124\rsid4861867\rsid4879344\rsid4982482\rsid5058249\rsid5061582\rsid5124621\rsid5178285
\rsid5256660\rsid5378531\rsid5396294\rsid5397288\rsid5401600\rsid5520929\rsid5536503\rsid5579526\rsid5658201\rsid5780765\rsid5796494\rsid5850352\rsid5898393\rsid5914641\rsid5967294\rsid5976089\rsid5988150\rsid6032431\rsid6053624\rsid6160781\rsid6240285
\rsid6367920\rsid6454429\rsid6517451\rsid6553605\rsid6559611\rsid6568001\rsid6584573\rsid6626957\rsid6696749\rsid6707431\rsid6759774\rsid6770180\rsid6829369\rsid6837291\rsid6898021\rsid6898856\rsid6951206\rsid7015099\rsid7025054\rsid7100191\rsid7158202
\rsid7239528\rsid7275349\rsid7291363\rsid7296958\rsid7348155\rsid7357677\rsid7419404\rsid7425694\rsid7433853\rsid7552482\rsid7558190\rsid7563492\rsid7610458\rsid7691765\rsid7697315\rsid7738947\rsid7805580\rsid7891384\rsid7893969\rsid7937868\rsid7942769
\rsid7945868\rsid8068313\rsid8137232\rsid8146722\rsid8271280\rsid8273239\rsid8278429\rsid8329196\rsid8354588\rsid8526620\rsid8589476\rsid8590146\rsid8654829\rsid8719218\rsid8724614\rsid8741958\rsid8857228\rsid8879589\rsid8914826\rsid9053404\rsid9066305
\rsid9175470\rsid9200243\rsid9205519\rsid9207783\rsid9261549\rsid9335267\rsid9390476\rsid9393973\rsid9444125\rsid9459531\rsid9510233\rsid9524396\rsid9654450\rsid9708099\rsid9709799\rsid9726099\rsid9776381\rsid9790931\rsid9836240\rsid9853667\rsid9859694
\rsid9899804\rsid9924414\rsid9988458\rsid10031652\rsid10039285\rsid10044499\rsid10182016\rsid10233628\rsid10238651\rsid10241343\rsid10309719\rsid10355033\rsid10381965\rsid10426765\rsid10436910\rsid10440677\rsid10494305\rsid10507590\rsid10554415
\rsid10559804\rsid10626732\rsid10635559\rsid10635620\rsid10688588\rsid10698617\rsid10768894\rsid10910878\rsid10967443\rsid11012474\rsid11038786\rsid11086915\rsid11151170\rsid11171837\rsid11207423\rsid11214014\rsid11296294\rsid11471970\rsid11477679
\rsid11493152\rsid11499259\rsid11550275\rsid11552374\rsid11614590\rsid11618313\rsid11620340\rsid11621995\rsid11624290\rsid11681030\rsid11689472\rsid11691450\rsid11750306\rsid11807289\rsid12008182\rsid12065899\rsid12083968\rsid12088505\rsid12126665
\rsid12127627\rsid12146230\rsid12203425\rsid12268342\rsid12279198\rsid12322213\rsid12339945\rsid12345670\rsid12479025\rsid12536303\rsid12592292\rsid12598517\rsid12665610\rsid12672180\rsid12677846\rsid12715558\rsid12792151\rsid12797272\rsid12984886
\rsid13332811\rsid13334883\rsid13370414\rsid13395460\rsid13528896\rsid13571273\rsid13591443\rsid13638945\rsid13653781\rsid13707064\rsid13720116\rsid13784217\rsid13834050\rsid13980363\rsid14040459\rsid14113699\rsid14114848\rsid14116901\rsid14233678
\rsid14239721\rsid14297225\rsid14308078\rsid14420470\rsid14423452\rsid14426677\rsid14430576\rsid14549393\rsid14554712\rsid14572347\rsid14615978\rsid14691951\rsid14813323\rsid14817466\rsid14825222\rsid14839410\rsid14891994\rsid15020645\rsid15022557
\rsid15154817\rsid15161221\rsid15219062\rsid15235626\rsid15340566\rsid15419617\rsid15420012\rsid15427471\rsid15535037\rsid15617531\rsid15664313\rsid15668992\rsid15685474\rsid15688864\rsid15730427\rsid15755742\rsid15889302\rsid15890026\rsid15891554
\rsid16022497\rsid16122288\rsid16153272\rsid16202920\rsid16255513\rsid16257590\rsid16265098\rsid16266971\rsid16386498\rsid16402308\rsid16410936\rsid16515523\rsid16527320\rsid16603723\rsid16604760\rsid16713644\rsid16714279\rsid16719041\rsid16723569}
{\*\generator Microsoft Word 10.0.2627;}{\info{\title Is it Possible 2}{\author Hoagie}{\operator Hoagie}{\creatim\yr2005\mo11\dy9\hr15\min10}{\revtim\yr2005\mo12\dy27\hr15\min45}{\version381}{\edmins5504}{\nofpages8}{\nofwords6025}{\nofchars34347}
{\nofcharsws40292}{\vern16437}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\hyphcaps0\formshade\horzdoc\dgmargin\dghspace180\dgvspace180\dghorigin1701\dgvorigin1984\dghshow1\dgvshow1
\jexpand\viewkind5\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\splytwnine\ftnlytwnine\htmautsp\nolnhtadjtbl\useltbaln\alntblind\lytcalctblwd\lyttblrtgr\lnbrkrule\nobrkwrptbl\snaptogridincell\allowfieldendsel\wrppunct\asianbrkrule\rsidroot9444125 \fet0\sectd 
\linex0\endnhere\sectlinegrid360\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}
{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid10554415 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\b\insrsid4083094 
\par }{\b\insrsid10554415 The following manuscript was written in the late 1970s but never published.
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid10554415 {\b\insrsid10554415 
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid9444125 {\b\insrsid4083094\charrsid9390476 IS IT POSSIBLE TO CONTROL POLLUTION?
\par }{\b\insrsid8590146 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid8590146 {\b\insrsid8590146 R. F. Mueller}{\b\insrsid7425694 , \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab December, 2005
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid9444125 {\b\insrsid4083094 
\par SUMMARY
\par }{\insrsid4083094\charrsid10494305 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid4083094 {\insrsid4083094\charrsid10494305 \tab 
The driving force of active pollutants of any kind results from their excess free energy relative to their innocuous degrada}{\insrsid10494305 tion products}{\super\insrsid10494305 1}{\insrsid10494305 .}{\insrsid12065899 
 The great variety of industrial processes and pollutants results in the statistical equivalence with respect to degree of deleteriousness of various technological}{\insrsid15685474 
 energy sources in their utilization and dissipation modes, and this deleteriousness depends on the total culture.}{\insrsid2573231  Thus, "clean" energy sources such as solar energy ultimately give rise to the same distribution
 of pollutants as "dirty" sources.}{\insrsid736103  Similarly, the concepts of "soft" and "hard" energy paths have no meaning in a thermodynamic sense.}{\insrsid11750306  }{\insrsid4083094 
\par }{\insrsid11750306 \tab Because all thermodynamically possible technological processes must be utterly spontaneous in sum, there can be no overall control of energy or the equivalent pollution.}{\insrsid2455054 
 In the installation of pollution control equipment this takes the form of an additional increment of energy and hence pollution, which is added to that already resulting from the primary industrial process.}{\insrsid7419404 
 Thus, any control exercised over local pollution generally results in}{\insrsid2560360  }{\insrsid7419404 pollution elsewhere.}{\insrsid11750306 
\par }{\insrsid8741958 
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid8741958 {\b\insrsid8741958\charrsid5061582 INTRODUCTION
\par }{\insrsid7239528 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid10768894 {\insrsid10768894 \tab 
This piece might just as well have been entitled "Is it Possible to Control Energy?" Certainly the connection between energy and pollution, seemingly misunderstood or at least obscured, in one way or another}{\insrsid11691450 ,}{\insrsid10768894 
 lies behin}{\insrsid274320 d the plethora of problems that}{\insrsid10768894  are actively eroding the benefits of modern technology and }{\insrsid16153272 are }{\insrsid10768894 calling this technology itself into question.}{\insrsid11477679  }{
\insrsid5967294 This state of affairs has encouraged the growth of unscientific myths, which not only have captured the public consciousness, but continue to be spread by the}{\insrsid1254251 
 highest scientific authorities, and most particularly by those in the r}{\insrsid11681030 anks of technological optimists}{\super\insrsid11681030 2}{\insrsid11681030 .}{\insrsid599741  Anticipate then that I regard the "contr
ol" of energy and pollution by technologic means as one of these myths, which Cambel}{\super\insrsid599741 3}{\insrsid599741  conveniently phrased as follows:}{\insrsid10768894 
\par }{\insrsid11151170 
\par \tab "The solution to the conflict between energy and the environment must not be in curtailing energy supply, but in reducing the irreversible and dissipative effects when we convert and consume energy."
\par 
\par \tab Or, in what is in part a corollary to this viewpoint, no less than a presidential science advisor}{\super\insrsid11151170 4 }{\insrsid11151170 stated:
\par 
\par \tab "We know that some time in the next century we will achieve a virtually unlimited, renewable and clean energy supply."
\par 
\par \tab }{\insrsid3146587 Even energy-environment specialists have joined in. However Odum}{\super\insrsid3146587 5}{\insrsid3146587  expressed som}{\insrsid2766131 e ambivalence when he wrote}{\insrsid3146587 :
\par 
\par \tab "With new, rich energy flows man can control and manage enormous quantities of the world's energy. }{\i\insrsid3146587\charrsid3146587 Increasingly he is affecting the whole biosphere.}{\insrsid3146587 " ( italics added )}{\insrsid11151170 
\par }{\insrsid2907238 \tab 
\par \tab It is not my aim here to argue that control of energy and pollution on even a quite large scale is precluded, although this may well be the case.}{\insrsid6898021 
 It is also well to clarify that what is meant here is control through technology, which is quite a different thing from the obvious methods of administrative control.}{\insrsid8271280 
 We have, on the basis of limited evidence, no reason to doubt the instances in which control technologies are said to have resulted in notable improvements in substantial air and water masses.}{\insrsid9790931 
 For example, the Presidents Council on Environmental Quality has documented recent decreases in concentration of carbon monoxide and other toxic air pollutants in a number of American cities as a result of emission controls.}{\insrsid14817466  }{
\insrsid1078443 Also, concentrations of such water pollution indicators as coliform bacteria and oxygen-demanding materials have shown decreases in some streams after sewage treatment was upgraded.}{\insrsid14817466  Other examples could be cited}{
\super\insrsid14817466 6 }{\insrsid14817466 .}{\insrsid3094870 
 However, these technological success stories only highlight the question of the efficacy of technology in solving problems which it gave rise to in the first place and which require inputs of additional energy. }{\insrsid1053411 We should al
ways bear in mind the simple logic that it takes energy to control energy.}{\insrsid4402905  In any case, the appalling scale of certain emerging pollution problems such as acid rain and toxic}{\insrsid1837858  organic chemicals should make us suspicious}
{\insrsid10635559  that local controls conceal larger regional effects}{\insrsid1837858 .}{\insrsid2907238 
\par }{\insrsid1910836 \tab It is clear that if our local pollution control efforts, be they yet so successful, do not result in }{\insrsid4327938 an }{\insrsid1910836 
overall decrease of pollution in qualitative and quantitative terms, or result in a worsening of global conditions, they are little more than hoaxes perpetrated on ourselves and posterity.}{\insrsid7805580 
 Secondly, it is obvious that to the present these large scale effects have not really been studied by those who advocate technologica}{\insrsid2438696 l}{\insrsid7805580  solutions.}{\insrsid2438696 
 In a sense this failure is understandable given the complexities not only of technology itself but also because}{\insrsid880690  of the need to consider}{\insrsid13528896  economic and social factors.}{\insrsid4745582 
 For example, in matters of economics of life styles, certain effects such as increased employment increments resulting from the initiation of pollu
tion control strategies are usually touted as desirable side effects, when in reality they contribute to undermining the original objective}{\insrsid6898856  ( see examples later! )}{\insrsid4745582 
. However, technocrats generally behave as if such problems do not exist or have been solved.}{\insrsid1910836 
\par }{\insrsid7937868 \tab The complexities inherent in the assessment of energy intensive technology}{\insrsid2368685  may prevent the assembly of adequate data or even our knowing precisely what data are required.}{\insrsid12127627 
 Another approach is open to us, however, since the same physical laws apply here as
 have been so successfully applied in laboratory experiments and in industrial processes, and some of these laws are broad enough in scope to enable us to draw certain conclusions and to eliminate certain alternatives based on the general nature of energy
 transformation}{\insrsid12598517 s}{\insrsid1250763 ,}{\insrsid12127627  despite the missing details. Foremost among these systems}{\insrsid15730427  is the classical thermodynamics.}{\insrsid7937868 
\par }{\insrsid12345670 \tab This science found its first applications in the explanation of precisely }{\insrsid14116901 those industrial processes that }{\insrsid12345670  still are cent
ral to our environmental dilemma and which appeared with the machines of the early industrial revolution.}{\insrsid2323766  We recall that Benjamin Thompson ( Count Rumford ) first surmised the conversion of }{\insrsid11621995 mechanical }{
\insrsid2323766 energy to heat in the process of boring a cannon, and at the same time dealt a fatal blow to the caloric theory}{\super\insrsid2323766 7 }{\insrsid2323766 .}{\insrsid6707431  This insight was followed by the precise experiments of Joule an
}{\insrsid8857228 d others, who also began the er}{\insrsid6707431 ection of the theoretical framework that culminated in the work of Gibbs.}{\insrsid9988458  }{\insrsid1641155 While this approach led to ever mo}{\insrsid3884384 
re sophisticated applications in}{\insrsid1641155  industrial processes and in pure science, it was, strangely, never extended to technology as}{\insrsid4457061  a whole, nor has there been any}{\insrsid1641155 
 widespread interest in obvious applications to environmental problems which have their source in this technology.}{\insrsid524462  Attention should however be paid to the efforts of Odum}{\super\insrsid524462 5 }{\insrsid524462 , Miller}{
\super\insrsid524462 8}{\insrsid524462  and, in the related field of economics, Georgescu-Roegen}{\super\insrsid524462 2}{\insrsid524462  . }{\insrsid15154817 With the exception of such rather isolated examples}{\insrsid8329196 ,}{\insrsid15154817 
 an impression is gained that}{\insrsid3485893 ,}{\insrsid15154817  while thermodynamics applies to individual machines, it does not apply to the sum of the effects of all machines or the general energy flux through society.}{\insrsid9776381 
 With the recent threat of energy shortages there has to be sure developed a considerable interest in various forms of ener
gy "bookkeeping", in which agricultural and industrial processes and the means of energy production have been studied exhaustively for their efficiencies.}{\insrsid12479025  A good example is the work of Kakela}{\super\insrsid5850352 9 }{\insrsid5850352 
, which purports to show support for the technological optimist's view that a resource can be indefinitely extended through technological progress.}{\insrsid2125801 
 However, these studies seldom are concerned with tracing energy use beyond the industrial process itself or with entropic effects.}{\insrsid11614590  While this approach has led to some usef
ul results and toward more quantification, it is not true thermodynamics, the application of which may actually enable us to dispense with much quantification of this type.}{\insrsid12345670 
\par }{\insrsid1855757 \tab The approach here also differs }{\insrsid16255513 in some important ways f}{\insrsid9726099 r}{\insrsid16255513 om those of Odum, Miller a
nd Georgescu-Roegen, since these authors seem to have at least a residual faith in the solutions of high technology.}{\insrsid28634  A}{\insrsid5914641 
lthough this impression is most apparent in the work of Odum, Miller looks with hope to a sort of cybernetic age in which information handling plays the paramount role.}{\insrsid10309719 
 Elsewhere, however, he states that"...there is no technologic solution to pollution." }{\insrsid2754359 Generally Georgescu-Roegen is very forceful in stressing the overriding power of entropic limits to technology.}{\insrsid7691765 
 Yet all these authors in one}{\insrsid7552482  way or another hold out hope t}{\insrsid7691765 hat humankind will discover the elixir of a source of clean, abundant technological energy}{\insrsid4007874 -generally regarded as solar in origin.}{
\insrsid13653781  Here, however, the reader will find this hope denied by more than skepticism, beginning with a
 concise definition of pollution as energy, as well as the argument for the ultimate statistical equivalence in terms of deleteriousness of all forms of technologic energy, whether they are "clean" or :dirty" in origin.}{\insrsid7610458 
 In this way a clean break is made with previous viewpoints on this subject.}{\insrsid1855757 
\par }{\b\insrsid14813323\charrsid5061582 
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid14813323 {\b\insrsid14813323\charrsid5061582 RELATION BETWEEN ENERGY AND POLLUTION
\par }{\insrsid14813323 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid14813323 {\insrsid2850348 \tab 
The unsavory relation between technological energy and pollution has of course been widely recognized, but almost invariably it has been assumed that technologists are crafty enough to cure the maladies technology itself has engendered.}{\insrsid12984886 
 }{\insrsid16386498 This attitude is quite apparent in the quotations cited earlier in which environmental problems brought on by glutinous consumption are regarded as avoidable or at least reducible to manageable proportions.}{\insrsid4216938 
 Can this be true? Can the fox really regurgitate live hens?}{\insrsid14813323 
\par }{\insrsid13980363 \tab To examine this question it is helpful to begin by generalizing the concept of a machine, which we may define as any technologic device or process intended to achieve some desired result through the expenditure of energy.}{
\insrsid8589476  This generalized machine, depicted in Figure 1, consists of a box in which a certain quantity of delivered fuel energy E}{\sub\insrsid14239721 f}{\super\insrsid8589476  }{\insrsid8589476  is converted into "work"}{\insrsid16527320  W}{
\insrsid8589476 , with an intended result R, and from which a quantity of wasted energy E}{\sub\insrsid8589476 1 }{\insrsid8589476 + Q}{\sub\insrsid8589476 1 }{\insrsid8589476 is emitted, where E}{\sub\insrsid8589476 1 }{\insrsid8589476 
is energy stored in the environment,}{\insrsid14239721  perhaps temporarily, and Q}{\sub\insrsid14239721 1 }{\insrsid14239721 is the dissipated heat.}{\insrsid13980363 
\par }{\insrsid14572347 \tab The energy symbol E represents the familiar thermodynamic state function, which usually consists of internal chemical energy of constitution, but may also include such forms as gravitational energy. Q and W are never state}{
\insrsid13591443  }{\insrsid14572347 functions but depend on the path of application.
\par }{\insrsid13591443 \tab A point of some significance here is that not only is there an unavoidable waste energy E}{\sub\insrsid13591443 1 }{\insrsid13591443 + Q}{\sub\insrsid13591443 1 }{\insrsid13591443 , depending on machine efficiency, }{
\insrsid5780765 but also the "useful work" W must inevitably be dissipated in its entirety as pollution E}{\sub\insrsid5780765 2 }{\insrsid5780765 + Q}{\sub\insrsid5780765 2 }{\insrsid5780765 , in what might be called the "Rumford Effect."}{
\insrsid2844712  Thus the environmental side effects of energy utilization extend far beyond energy production and industrial use to consumer use and "wear-out", in which the energy of constitution, in indeterminate but usually deleterious modes}{
\insrsid14114848 , interacts}{\insrsid2844712  in most intimate ways with organisms, and in particular with humankind.}{\insrsid10507590  Thi
s happens, for example, when asbestos contaminates such consumer products as baby powder, or when tissue-reactive hair dyes are used.}{\insrsid7291363 
 Although such cases are recognized as pollution, they are not usually considered as resulting from the dissipation of technological energy.}{\insrsid13591443 
\par }{\insrsid9066305 \tab It is a refinement to point out that sometimes a quantity of energy is stored in R, as when work is expended in lifting a mass.}{\insrsid7348155 
 However, frequently this is not the case, and R does not represent a higher energy state than the preexisting one. }{\insrsid9853667 In fact, R may represent a lower resultant energy state for a product than a }{\insrsid8526620  previous one. }{
\insrsid9335267 In the case of no energy gain, the energy has been expended on the environment, as in }{\insrsid9836240 much }{\insrsid9335267 transportation, in which it is dissipated as friction or as other forms, and does not reside in the mass.}{
\insrsid9066305 
\par }{\insrsid9924414 \tab The operation of a machine is most easily perceived in the common cyclic engine in which E}{\sub\insrsid9924414 f }{\insrsid9924414  is first transformed into heat Q. }{\insrsid4330085 In this case the work is derived from Q }{
\insrsid4217126 , }{\insrsid4330085 and Q}{\sub\insrsid4330085 1 }{\insrsid4330085 is rejected into the environment as waste. The thermal efficiency of such a machine is}{\insrsid9924414 
\par }{\insrsid4330085 
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid4330085 {\insrsid4330085 ( W/Q ) = (Q-Q}{\sub\insrsid4330085 1 }{\insrsid4330085 )/Q,
\par 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid4330085 {\insrsid4330085 which is strictly limited by the difference in temperature between the heat source and sink and cannot exceed the effic
iency of the ideal Carnot engine.}{\insrsid11207423  An important point here is that in addition to the initial dissipation of the heat Q}{\sub\insrsid11207423 1 }{\insrsid11207423 the dissipation of W as E}{\sub\insrsid11207423 2 }{\insrsid11207423  + Q}
{\sub\insrsid11207423 2 }{\insrsid11207423  is indispensable to the operation of the machine, as when friction between the wheels and ground is required to move a vehicle.}{\insrsid4330085 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid8914826 {\insrsid10381965 \tab }{\insrsid8879589 
It is interesting to consider a quite different example, the expenditure of a chemical pesticide to kill some target organism.}{\insrsid10698617  In this case also there is an initial input of chemical energy E}{\sub\insrsid10698617 f }{\insrsid10698617 
, which enters the habitat of the target.}{\insrsid7296958 
 Some of this energy impinges directly on the organism and is analogous to mechanical work. However, the greatest part of the energy misses the target and interacts with non-target organisms or other substances of the environment.}{\insrsid5378531 
 In this process some energy storage occurs and some heat is released through the chemical reactions which occur.}{\insrsid15235626  Thus again E}{\sub\insrsid15235626 1 }{\insrsid15235626 + Q}{\sub\insrsid15235626 1 }{\insrsid15235626 is dissipated.}{
\insrsid1270617  However, even that part of the pesticide energy which reaches the target organism continues to interact with the environment and 
non-target organisms as partially degraded ( in part metabolized ) but still reactive forms of the original chemical. This is E}{\sub\insrsid1270617 2 }{\insrsid1270617 + Q}{\sub\insrsid1270617 2 }{\insrsid1270617 .}{\insrsid10381965 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid4330085 {\insrsid11086915 \tab At this point it is helpful to introduce additional thermodynamic state functions, the entropy S, and the Gibbs Free Energy G.}{
\insrsid14233678 
 The entropy function is important because it incorporates the effect of the Second Law of thermodynamics. G simply represents a convenient artifice because it includes frequently occurring combinations of more familiar variables of the system under
 consideration.}{\insrsid13571273  Thus we have the fundamental relation}{\insrsid11086915 
\par }{\insrsid13571273 
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid13571273 {\insrsid13571273 G}{\sub\insrsid13571273 sy }{\insrsid13571273 = E}{\sub\insrsid13571273 sy }{\insrsid5058249 - TS}{\sub\insrsid5058249 sy }{
\insrsid5058249 + PV}{\sub\insrsid5058249 sy                            \tab \tab \tab                                         }{\insrsid5058249 (1)}{\insrsid13571273 
\par }{\insrsid6559611 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid6559611 {\insrsid6559611 in which P is the pressure, V the volume, T the temperature in degrees Kelvin, and E is the energy as previously defined. The}{
\insrsid3894016  subscript sy indicates the system under consideration as distinguished from the surroundings.}{\insrsid6559611 
\par }{\insrsid12677846 \tab The justification for introducing G}{\sub\insrsid12677846 sy }{\insrsid12677846  is that E}{\sub\insrsid12677846 sy}{\insrsid12677846  , the energy of the system, does not necessarily change ( increas}{\insrsid14839410 e}{
\insrsid12677846  or decrease ) in any indicative manner in a given process, while G}{\sub\insrsid12677846 sy }{\insrsid12677846  invariably decreases if the process is physically realizable ( spontaneous ). Thus, the change in free energy deltaG}{
\sub\insrsid12677846 sy }{\insrsid12677846 < 0 , provides an index of great utility in environmental problems, as it}{\insrsid27338  does in conventional technologic and scientific applications.}{\insrsid15020645  On the other hand, deltaS}{
\sub\insrsid15020645 sy}{\insrsid15020645  , as well as deltaE}{\sub\insrsid15020645 sy }{\insrsid15020645 may be zero, negative or positive in a given spontaneous process, depending on circumstances.}{\insrsid10182016  However, deltaS}{
\sub\insrsid10182016 sy }{\insrsid10182016 is related to the total or net entropy change deltaS}{\sub\insrsid10182016 T }{\insrsid10182016  and the entropy change of the surroundings deltaS}{\sub\insrsid10182016 su  }{\insrsid10182016 as}{\insrsid9859694 
 follows:}{\insrsid12677846 
\par }{\insrsid13834050 
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid13834050 {\insrsid13834050 deltaS}{\sub\insrsid13834050 sy}{\insrsid13834050  + deltaS}{\sub\insrsid13834050 su }{\insrsid13834050 = deltaS}{\sub\insrsid13834050 T }{
\insrsid13834050 .                                                                   (2)
\par 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid13834050 {\insrsid14839410 Since}{\insrsid873479 ,}{\insrsid14839410  by the Second Law of thermodynamics}{\insrsid873479 ,}{\insrsid14839410  deltaS}{
\sub\insrsid14839410 T }{\insrsid14839410  must always be positive for any spontaneous process, it, like deltaG}{\sub\insrsid14839410 sy }{\insrsid14839410  , provides a}{\insrsid10626732  }{\insrsid14839410 useful index of such a process.}{
\insrsid12672180  The choice between deltaG}{\sub\insrsid12672180 sy }{\insrsid12672180  and deltaS}{\sub\insrsid12672180 T }{\insrsid12672180 is a matter of convenience in practical calculations, since values of the former are frequently tabulated}{
\insrsid10910878 ,}{\insrsid12672180  or a matter of taste in theoretical discussions, with }{\insrsid5401600 the }{\insrsid12672180 latter preferred by some authors such as Georgescu-Roegen}{\super\insrsid12672180 2 }{\insrsid12672180 , for example.}{
\insrsid13834050 
\par }{\insrsid9549 \tab As an illustration of the critical role of energy in environmental degradation we consider the notorious pollutant carbon monoxide, which may also react with atmospheric oxygen as follows:
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid9549 {\insrsid9549 
\par Carbon monoxide        oxygen               carbon dioxide
\par     CO     +             !/2 O}{\sub\insrsid9549 2      }{\insrsid9549 ===>         CO}{\sub\insrsid9549 2     }{\sub\insrsid8914826 
\par 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid8914826 {\insrsid15420012 Under the standard temperature and pressure ( STP ) conditions ( T= 298}{\super\insrsid15420012 o }{\insrsid15420012 K, P}{
\sub\insrsid15420012 O2 }{\insrsid15420012  = P}{\sub\insrsid15420012 CO }{\insrsid15420012  = P}{\sub\insrsid15420012 CO2}{\insrsid15420012  = 1}{\insrsid3475077  atmosphere ), whic}{\insrsid3553573 h serve as a basis of reference,}{\insrsid13720116 
 deltaG}{\sub\insrsid13720116 sy }{\insrsid13720116 for the above reaction is -61,650 calories}{\super\insrsid13720116 10}{\insrsid13720116 .}{\insrsid9654450  Whether CO}{\insrsid5124621 
 reacts in this innocuous manner in the open air or in a deleterious manner within an organism, of course depends on where the reactive molecule finds itself.}{\insrsid16410936 
 The point here is that in a thermodynamic sense the reaction occurs because the reactants ( CO and O}{\sub\insrsid16410936 2 }{\insrsid16410936 in this case ) have excess }{\sub\insrsid9549  }{\insrsid16410936 free energy relative to the product ( CO}{
\sub\insrsid16410936 2 }{\insrsid16410936 in this case ).}{\insrsid7025054 
\par \tab The foregoing example illustrates the universal characteristic of chemical pollutants by which they possess free energy in excess of that possessed by their degradation products and thus defines the fundamental relation between energy and pollution.}
{\insrsid4861867  Of course, degradation is usually step-wise, and in this case although CO}{\sub\insrsid4861867 2 }{\insrsid4861867 may be regarded as less noxious than CO by some, it should be remembered that the former also h
as a potential deleteriousness in that it enhances Earth's greenhouse effect and may}{\insrsid424161 ,}{\insrsid4861867  in time}{\insrsid424161 ,}{\insrsid4861867  }{\sub\insrsid9549  }{\insrsid11807289 bring about disast}{\insrsid2360722 
rous global warming}{\insrsid4861867 .}{\insrsid11807289  }{\sub\insrsid9549   }{\insrsid11807289 However, further degradation is possible, as when CO}{\sub\insrsid11807289 2 }{\insrsid11807289 reacts with crustal rocks to form}{\insrsid9393973  such}{
\insrsid11807289  stable carbonates as MgCO}{\sub\insrsid11807289 3 }{\insrsid11807289 and CaCO}{\sub\insrsid11807289 3}{\super\insrsid11807289 11 }{\insrsid11807289 , which for all practical purposes eliminate this constituent as any form of pollutant.}{
\insrsid4785859  Unfortunately, the latter reaction}{\insrsid12339945 s are}{\insrsid4785859  too slow to be of much help.}{\sub\insrsid9549        }{\sub\insrsid12792151 
\par \tab }{\insrsid12792151 Many other examples could be cited.}{\insrsid15889302 
 Thus, the common stack emissions of fossil fuel-fired power plants contain sulfur dioxide, which reacts with atmospheric and stack oxygen and water to yield highly corrosive sulfuric acid, which not only injures living tissue, but attacks metals and even
 silicates of building stone}{\sub\insrsid9549  }{\super\insrsid15889302 12}{\insrsid15889302 . }{\insrsid4132969 Recently far-flung deterioration of fishing waters and vegetation from this source has been recognized in acid rain}{\super\insrsid4132969 13
}{\insrsid4132969 .}{\insrsid12126665 
\par \tab Excess free energy is not confined to chemical reactants, but is a universal property of all pollutants.}{\sub\insrsid9549  }{\sub\insrsid7738947 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid7738947 {\insrsid7738947 
It manifests itself in such diverse cases as silt pollution of bodies of water, in destructive erosion of soils, and in toxic effects of certain microscopic particles.}{\insrsid9207783 
 For example, "pure" water falling on soils of natural areas does not behave as a pollutant because it has not been excessively energized.}{\insrsid7357677 
 Yet, through human activity it may become a pollutant. If vegetated lands are deprived of their cover and mechanically disturbed, as in timber cutting or overgrazing, }{\insrsid4658681 their soils are eroded and transporte
d by more rapidly flowing and hence energetic water, whose excess energy is then transferred to the soil particles.}{\insrsid5796494 
 Even clear water energized by flowing over technologically smoothed surfaces such as pavements may be considered a pollutant since the excess kinetic energy it thus acquires will later be spent in eroding stream beds and banks.}{\insrsid4462200 
 As distinguished from technological energy which has its source in fuels, this form of pollutant energy has its source in natural energy flows which have become misdirected through far smaller "activating" technological energy inputs}{
\super\insrsid10967443 14}{\insrsid10967443 .}{\insrsid3675601  Such deleterious hydrologic effects are at th}{\insrsid12322213 e heart of worldwide problems of}{\insrsid4080161  desert}{\insrsid3675601 ification, flooding and famine.}{\insrsid8914826 

\par }{\insrsid12083968 \tab The most familiar example of the toxic particle effect is the hazard of the mineral asbestos.}{\insrsid5898393 
 The toxicity of asbestos probably results from excess free energy which it acquires during processing when the mechanical separation and fracture of fibers results in numerous poorly compensated charges on the fiber surfaces and edges.}{\insrsid139036 
 These charges would tend to react readily and deleteriously with contacting tissues much as do ions produced by radiation.}{\insrsid12083968 
\par }{\insrsid2647388 \tab If, as we have inferred, all forms of pollution are characterized by excess free energy, does it then follow that all energy ends up as pollution, corresponding to energy = pollution?}{\insrsid1448180 
 The answer to this question is to be found in the evolutionary history throughout  which organisms have become adapted to specific types and spectral ranges of energy.}{\insrsid2390042  As an illustration, visible ligh
t energy is obviously the opposite of pollution to green plants, while excess ultraviolet or gamma rays would constitute obvious pollution.}{\insrsid6517451 
 Unfortunately, nearly all technological energy corresponds to pollution due to this maladaptation quality factor.}{\insrsid12322213  At this point it is also well to stress t}{\insrsid2168589 h}{\insrsid12322213 
at this factor is at the heart of the degree of deleteriousness which different forms of energy of identical quantitative measure possess. Elsewhere}{\super\insrsid12322213 14}{\insrsid12322213 
 the writer has indicated the need to make general allowance for this differential deleteriousness in a factor analogous to the "quality factor" already in use in dealing with radioactive substances.}{\insrsid2647388 
\par }{\insrsid1717866 \tab An }{\insrsid5536503 entirely different way in which energy of pollutants manifests itself is through the process by which these su}{\insrsid4009843 b}{\insrsid5536503 stances become dispersed in the environment.}{\insrsid4009843 
 If, for example, we consider a hypothetical toxic solid A that becomes an active pollutant by dissolving in water, we may write the solution reaction as}{\insrsid1717866 
\par }{\insrsid4009843 
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid4009843 {\insrsid4009843     Solid         Solution
\par A   ===>    A
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid4009843 {\insrsid4009843 To simplify the illustration we assume that A forms an "ideal" mixture with water}{\super\insrsid4009843 11}{\insrsid4009843 
. The change in Gibbs Free Energy}{\insrsid10039285  on solution may then be written as}{\insrsid4009843 
\par }{\insrsid10039285 
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid10039285 {\insrsid10039285 deltaG = deltaG}{\super\insrsid10039285 o }{\insrsid10039285  + RTln X}{\sub\insrsid10039285 A}{\insrsid10039285 , }{\insrsid11171837 
                            }{\insrsid16723569    }{\insrsid11171837 (3)}{\insrsid10039285 
\par 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid10039285 {\insrsid10039285 where R is the universal gas constant, deltaG}{\super\insrsid10039285 o }{\insrsid10039285 
is the Gibbs Free Energy change under standard reference conditions when X}{\sub\insrsid10039285 A}{\insrsid10039285 = 1, and lnX}{\sub\insrsid10039285 A}{\insrsid10039285  is the natural logarithm of X}{\sub\insrsid4025442 A}{\insrsid10039285 
, the mole fraction concentration of A in the water solution.}{\insrsid4599540  It is obvious that as X}{\sub\insrsid4599540 A }{\insrsid14308078 ==> }{\insrsid4599540 0, corresponding to high dilution or "pure" wa
ter, deltaG assumes highly negative values, or deltaG << 0}{\insrsid4982482  for any constant value of deltaG}{\super\insrsid4982482 o}{\insrsid4599540 , so that there is developed an enormous driving potential to bring the toxic substance into solution.}
{\insrsid12536303  We note that for any constant value of deltaG}{\super\insrsid12536303 o }{\insrsid12536303  this potential results solely from the entropy of mixing term }{\insrsid6367920 -}{\insrsid15891554 R}{\insrsid12536303 lnX}{
\sub\insrsid12536303 A }{\insrsid12536303 , which is an important contribution to the negative free energy change.. This type of entropy change is always positive and provides a measure of the tendency of molecules A to "get lost" among the 
water molecules.}{\insrsid10238651  It is this effect which is behind much chemical pollution and which makes it so difficult to prevent and clean up.}{\insrsid1117146 
 It is also a wonderful illustration of the physical constraints on resource inputs in the economic process, as has been stressed by Georgescu-Roegen}{\super\insrsid1117146 2 }{\insrsid1117146 .}{\insrsid4087711  Because}{\insrsid10688588 
 of this effect resources which are originally dilute}{\insrsid16515523 ,}{\insrsid10688588  or which have been irreversibly dispersed through use}{\insrsid16515523 ,}{\insrsid10688588 
 become prohibitively expensive to recover, and no industrial process can be designed to circumvent it.}{\insrsid87196  An attempt in this direction was made by Kakela}{\super\insrsid87196 9 }{\insrsid87196 
, who used as an illustration the energy and labor savings which result from a shift from high grade to pelletized low grade iron ores.}{\insrsid12008182  However, in this case the savings are attributable to the fortuitous textural a
nd magnetic properties of the latter.}{\insrsid13707064  His analysis also ignores the component of energy dissipation which in mining these ores results in serious pollution, especially by amphibolitic }{\insrsid3361628 asbestos}{\super\insrsid3361628 15
}{\insrsid3361628 .}{\insrsid10039285 
\par }{\insrsid14423452 \tab }{\b\insrsid14423452\charrsid14423452 
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid14423452 {\b\insrsid14423452\charrsid14423452 THERMODYNAMICS OF TECHNOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT}{\b\insrsid14423452 
\par 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid14423452 {\insrsid14423452 \tab 
We note first of all that nature does not distinguish between the primary activities of processing, manufacturing, etc., which supposedly benefit humanity and which give rise to environmental problems, and those secondary activities}{\insrsid8354588 ,}{
\insrsid14423452  such as recycling and pollution control}{\insrsid8354588 ,}{\insrsid14423452  which are intended to solve these problems.}{\insrsid8354588  }{\insrsid9175470 
Both are subject to the same limiting thermodynamic laws. In this sense there is no difference between a polluting factory and the pollution control device intended to abate pollution, no diffe
rence between the so-called benign or "soft" technology that is hailed as a panacea by some environmentalists}{\super\insrsid9175470 16 }{\insrsid9175470 and its "hard" counterpart.}{\insrsid13332811 
 The same argument applies to the concepts of "clean" and "dirty" technological energy as usually distinguished.}{\insrsid10355033  Furt
hermore, I will try to show that the concept of technological efficiency, which is touted as one of the cures for industrial pollution, loses its meaning if the environment is factored in.}{\insrsid14423452 
\par }{\insrsid14825222 \tab We have seen that the manifold pollutants have the one common char
acteristic of possessing excess free energy relative to their degradation products. This energy is either 1) inherent in the raw materials ( such as fuels ), 2) is conferred by processing or manufacturing or 3) results inadvertently from a variety of huma
n activities.
\par }{\insrsid15668992 \tab }{\insrsid1404446 The efficiency of a machine may be illustrated as in Figure 2, which shows how this may be increased by diverting a greater proportion of input energy to "useful work." }{\insrsid8137232 
However, we have already noted how uncontrolled dissipated energy E}{\sub\insrsid8137232 2}{\insrsid8137232  + Q}{\sub\insrsid8137232 2 }{\insrsid8137232  results from degradation of this work.}{\insrsid4814124 
 This disposes of the idea that pollution is solely the result of "waste." We note first of all that there is no intrinsic reason why E}{\sub\insrsid4814124 2 }{\insrsid4814124 , Q}{\sub\insrsid4814124 2 }{\insrsid4814124 
 etc. should be less deleterious in nature than E}{\sub\insrsid4814124 1}{\insrsid4814124 , Q}{\sub\insrsid4814124 1}{\insrsid4814124  etc. Also, if we imagine that an increase in efficiency results in a new distribution E'}{\sub\insrsid4814124 2}{
\insrsid4814124 , Q'}{\sub\insrsid4814124 2 }{\insrsid4814124 etc., we have no reason to }{\insrsid15427471 hope that in general deleteriousness will decrease per unit of energy dissipated.}{\insrsid6053624 
 Finally, we note that on average different energy sources will, in the same culture, result in the same general distribution of pollutant energy forms, and hence degree of deleteriousness.}{\insrsid12146230 
 Thus hydro or solar electric energy will be used to produce identical toxic chemicals as does that of nuclear electricity.}{\insrsid10440677  The great varie
ty of energy conversions in modern technology assures a certain statistical equivalence of deleteriousness in each unit of energy utilized, regardless of source, and the average degree of deleteriousness is a function of the total culture at a given momen
t.}{\insrsid5579526  Consequently}{\insrsid14891994 ,}{\insrsid5579526  the environment on average sees only E}{\sub\insrsid5579526 f }{\insrsid5579526  or Q, the total energy input.}{\insrsid11038786 
 In this context the only benefit to the environment of increasing the efficiency W/Q is that such an increase}{\insrsid6568001  will require a smaller Q or E}{\sub\insrsid6568001 f }{\insrsid6568001  to accomplish a given task.}{\insrsid14554712 
 In other words, the environmental impact of a machine depends primarily not on W/Q, but on Q. From this result it may be concluded that no matter how efficient industry becomes, continuous expansion can only bring increasing pollution and environmental d
eterioration.}{\insrsid15668992 
\par }{\insrsid3697484 \tab The indeterminateness of the E's}{\insrsid3226636  }{\insrsid3697484 and Q's with respect to }{\insrsid3226636 
deleteriousness results from the same Second Law constraints that impose quantitative limits on W/Q and is an expression of the}{\insrsid2370881  characteristic that all energy transformations are utterly spontaneous.}{\insrsid8068313 
 Consequently there can be no}{\i\insrsid8068313\charrsid6584573  overall }{\insrsid8068313 control of energy release or utilization.}{\insrsid5256660 
 Energetically all that is accomplished in the industrial process is the "arrangement" of energy events such as useful chemical reactions in a manner analogous to the arrangement of a party or celebration. However, the energy party always proce}{
\insrsid7158202 eds according to its own rules (}{\insrsid5256660  which an invention discovers ) and usually feeds on larger and more remote energy systems whose very existence is sometimes unsuspected.}{\insrsid15161221 
 For example, we should question who monitors all the pollution that results from a pol}{\insrsid16402308 lution control program!}{\insrsid3697484 
\par }{\insrsid9205519 \tab Although the Second Law effects form the basis of machine inefficiencies and environmental impacts, they are also vital to its very operation.}{\insrsid9709799 
 Thus the increase in entropy and the energy loss associated with friction are not only necessary to such processes }{\insrsid14430576 as locomotion, but act to dissipate the energy after it is utilized. For example, friction
 between wheels and ground is required to move a vehicle, but the resultant heat must be dissipated to prevent undue rise in temperature.}{\insrsid3109485 
 Similarly, in the case of a chemical pesticide, the increase in entropy associated with the spontaneous dissemination and dissolution of the pesticide, as described by}{\insrsid11171837 
 equation (3), is a requirement for reaching the target organism, although it is also an index of inefficient use and results in undesirable impacts.}{\insrsid9205519 
\par }{\insrsid14426677 \tab Now consider the effect of the application of a pollution control device on an industry from the standpoint of the First Law requirements on energy flows.}{\insrsid6553605 
 First consider the situation without pollution controls, in which a quantity of energy E}{\sub\insrsid6553605 1 }{\insrsid6553605 is applied to raw materials M}{\sub\insrsid6553605 1 }{\insrsid6553605 , yielding a useful product M}{\sub\insrsid6553605 2}
{\sub\insrsid10426765  }{\insrsid10426765 and pollution P}{\sub\insrsid10426765 1}{\insrsid10426765 .}{\insrsid4208028  The Ps and Ms incorporate the same internal energies of constitution as the Es and are expressed in the same units.}{\insrsid11552374 
 However, implicit in them are other energy forms as well.}{\insrsid16022497  Thus the Ps may be regarded as equivalent to E}{\sub\insrsid16022497 1 }{\insrsid16022497 + Q}{\sub\insrsid16022497 1}{\insrsid16022497 , while the usefu
l product dissipates to E}{\sub\insrsid16022497 2 }{\insrsid16022497 + Q}{\sub\insrsid16022497 2 }{\insrsid16022497 as discussed earlier.}{\insrsid15340566 
 The pollutants individually and collectively are subject to the constraints of equation (1), as expressions of the Second Law, which also limits control over the degree of deleteriousness.}{\insrsid14426677 
\par }{\insrsid3102701 \tab If pollution control energy E}{\sub\insrsid3102701 c }{\insrsid3102701 is applied to pollution P}{\sub\insrsid3102701 1}{\insrsid3102701 ,  the latter is thereby reduced to P'}{\sub\insrsid3102701 1}{\insrsid3102701 .}{
\insrsid6837291  Note , however, that by the First Law, the }{\insrsid11296294 "}{\insrsid6837291 controlled}{\insrsid11296294 "}{\insrsid6837291  component P}{\sub\insrsid6837291 1 }{\insrsid6837291 - P'}{\sub\insrsid6837291 1}{\insrsid6837291 
 has not disappeared, but has merely been transformed and/or transported elsewhere.}{\insrsid12203425  Furthermore, the added increment E}{\sub\insrsid12203425 c }{\insrsid12203425 = P'}{\sub\insrsid12203425 1 }{\insrsid12203425 + P}{\sub\insrsid12203425 
2 }{\insrsid12203425 - P}{\sub\insrsid12203425 1}{\insrsid12203425 , where the total dissipated energy of pollution control}{\insrsid13370414 ,}{\insrsid12203425  represented by P}{\sub\insrsid12203425 2}{\insrsid12203425 , must now be disposed of.}{
\insrsid9899804  For example, the sludges generated by certain pollution control devices may be transported to disposal areas where they bring blight to the landscape and poison water supplies}{\super\insrsid9899804 17}{\insrsid9899804 , or SO}{
\sub\insrsid9899804 2 }{\insrsid9899804 vented in tall smokestacks may appear hundreds of miles downwind as acid rain.}{\insrsid1377051  Proposals for the reclamation of useful chemicals from such sludges and emissions would of course incr
ease the increment E}{\sub\insrsid1377051 c}{\insrsid1377051 .}{\insrsid12797272  The important point, however, is that P}{\sub\insrsid12797272 2 }{\insrsid12797272 + P'}{\sub\insrsid12797272 1 }{\insrsid12797272 > P}{\sub\insrsid12797272 1}{
\insrsid12797272 , which is the inevitable result from the laws of thermodynamics.}{\insrsid5976089  Also, as we have seen, the statistics of the diverse Ps results in a rough equivalence in their degrees of deleteriousness.}{\insrsid15535037 
 Generally, however, one pollution form is favored over another for cultural or other reasons}{\insrsid2034775 , resulting in tradeoffs}{\insrsid2389917  which may not always be wise}{\insrsid15535037 
. For example, the immediate benefit of achieving clean sewage plant effluent is }{\insrsid12088505 usually }{\insrsid15535037 deemed more important than assurance of }{\insrsid16603723 the }{\insrsid15535037 safe disposal }{\insrsid16603723 
of resultant sludges}{\insrsid12088505 , which may}{\insrsid860424  eventually}{\insrsid12088505  poison ground water}{\insrsid16603723 .}{\insrsid1058737  A more suitable effort would entail}{\insrsid10233628  }{\insrsid1206042 
the low energy solution of }{\insrsid10233628 prohibiting}{\insrsid1058737  toxic materials such as heavy metals, pesticides and household chemicals from entering the sewage system in the first place.}{\insrsid3102701 
\par }{\insrsid12268342 
\par 
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid12268342 {\b\insrsid12268342\charrsid5658201 CONCLUSIONS
\par }{\b\insrsid16266971 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid16266971 {\insrsid16266971 \tab The monstrous character of nuclear energy is brought home to us by a quotation from Weinberg}{\super\insrsid16266971 18 }{
\insrsid16266971 to the effect that nuclear technologists have made a Faustian bargain of sorts with society, the chief problem being the long term "control" necessary in safeguarding nuclear wastes.}{\insrsid7942769  However, the analogy does}{
\insrsid12715558  not go far enough in that the "}{\insrsid7942769 bargain" is seen here as a}{\insrsid12715558 n illusion of control which per}{\insrsid7942769 vades }{\i\insrsid7942769\charrsid12715558 all }{\insrsid7942769 
of energy intensive technology.}{\insrsid16266971  
\par }{\insrsid9510233 \tab Although it is difficult to do a sufficiently th}{\insrsid3409829 o}{\insrsid9510233 rough bookkeeping job to uncover all the energy input and dissipation modes of even a simple technology, some highly suggestive indicators exist.}{
\insrsid7891384  From the literature of "pollution control", for example, there emerges a sequence of cases of varying degrees of obviousness of the breakdown or failure of control.}{\insrsid8654829 
 Rather than discuss the most obvious cases, which, for example, incl
ude that of a technology not achieving previously set standards, we pass immediately to that of greatest interest, in which completely effective pollution control is apparently achieved, but, as has been true so far, external interactions of the control t
echnology have not been taken into account.}{\insrsid12279198 
 The indirect form of pollution envisioned stems here not only from the complexities of the technology itself, but to a great degree from its societal underpinnings, from the many connections and lifestyle ramifications still mostly un}{\insrsid6696749 a}
{\insrsid12279198 p}{\insrsid6696749 p}{\insrsid12279198 reciated.}{\insrsid6696749  }{\insrsid11624290 The statistical equivalence of pollution and technological energy argued for earlier provides a convenient bridge to studies such as those of Hannon}{
\super\insrsid11624290 19 }{\insrsid11624290  and Herendeen}{\super\insrsid11624290 20 }{\insrsid11624290 , which relate the degree of energy intensiveness to economic factors and life styles.}{\insrsid11499259 
 According to these studies there is an almost linear relation between total consumer ( family ) energy use and income, so that regardless social stratum}{\insrsid6770180 ,}{\insrsid11499259 
 total energy use rises directly with income. We need only substitute "pollution" for "energy" in this relation. Not surprisingly it was found by them that the most labor intensive activity ranked lowest on the economic scale.}{\insrsid9510233 
\par }{\insrsid2903308 \tab The bearing of all this on the effects of pollution control technology is as follows: It is appare
nt first of all that any technology, no matter how sophisticated, has numerous links to basic extractive industries, support industries, etc. that }{\insrsid8273239 are }{\insrsid2903308 usually highly }{\insrsid10044499 
pollution prone in their own rights.}{\insrsid9200243  Thus a pollution control technology may itself ultima
tely depend on rather primitive mining industries as well as fossil or nuclear fuels that emit a host of toxic pollutants, albeit in remote locations.}{\insrsid4354004 
 More interesting, however, is the supporting societal infrastructure. For example, it is a common boast of the environmental optimist that one of the benefits of pollution control programs is that they "create jobs." }{\insrsid5397288 
According to an article by Green}{\super\insrsid5397288 21 }{\insrsid5397288 , the US Environmental Protection Agency estimates that the number of jobs directly resulting from pollution control expenditures is as high as }{\insrsid11012474 
600,000. Similar figures are quoted for West Germany. Now we know that many of these jobs are of a highly skilled nature and pay well, so that they fall high on the Hannon and Herendeen curve. }{\insrsid4222562  Thus pollution control must
 give rise to the same two classes-production and consumption- of pollution sources, and of the same order of intensity, as does ordinar}{\insrsid6829369 y consumer activity in an afflue}{\insrsid4222562 nt society.}{\insrsid16202920 
 The pollutants thus generated are of course an integral part of P}{\sub\insrsid16202920 2}{\insrsid16202920 .}{\insrsid2903308 
\par }{\insrsid4152293 \tab It must also be concluded that if the evolution of society as a whole is considered}{\insrsid6829369 , there appears to have been no real progress in the efficiency of energy use or in stemming waste and pollution from this source.}
{\insrsid7563492  There can of course be no doubt that}{\insrsid8146722 ,}{\insrsid7563492  taken by themselves}{\insrsid8146722 ,}{\insrsid7563492 
 the efficiencies of modern factories with respect to energy and material use greatly exceed their earlier counterparts}{\super\insrsid7563492 22 }{\insrsid7563492 
. Yet the progressive use by industry of more dilute ( lower grade ) material resources imposes an inefficiency of its}{\insrsid8146722  own on total resource use that }{\insrsid7563492 
counters increases in the machine efficiency which makes this use possible.}{\insrsid14691951  For example, the mining of low grade ores made possible by new machines and techniques creates more waste and pollution per ton of metal recove
red than ever before}{\super\insrsid14691951 2 }{\insrsid14691951 .}{\insrsid685129  Consequently, the total effect of mining activities and those industries which depend on them is constantly decreasing efficiency.}{\insrsid15890026 
 Also, the advent of ever more technologically elaborate and sometimes more energy efficient machines in the consumer society has given rise to corresponding increases in trivialization, which, in a pragmatic sense, is inefficiency.}{\insrsid12592292 
 The smoky but practical passenger trains of the }{\insrsid11493152 19}{\insrsid12592292 30s were replaced by automobiles traveling over highly impractical routes ( suburban commuting etc. ) or for entirely trivial reasons.}{\insrsid9524396  Similarly}{
\insrsid16265098 ,}{\insrsid9524396  the recycled milk bottles and other containers of this early period yielded to the "throw away" system of today.}{\insrsid4152293 
\par }{\insrsid13784217 \tab }{\insrsid4723762 On the other side of the coin we have seen that ever increasing entropy associated with the ever expanding technological energy flux is synonymous with disorder and loss of control.}{\insrsid15617531 
 Is it possible then that there is a simpler relation between energy use and social problems than anyone suspected?}{\insrsid10559804  Is there, despite the elaborat
ion of technology, an inevitable decrease in social order which results from this massive societal energy flux that can no longer }{\insrsid720947 simply }{\insrsid10559804 be rejected into the  "surroundings."}{\insrsid6032431 
 Certainly the disordering effects of superimposing high energy economies and social mores on traditional societies such as those of the Middle East are apparent.}{\insrsid15419617 
 Even the fact that corresponding social disorder does not appear in even higher energy established industrial societies}{\insrsid5178285 ,}{\insrsid15419617  does not contradict this thesis}{\insrsid16122288 ,}{\insrsid15419617  since the latter may 
have achieved an at least metastable adaptation of sorts during the comparatively slow evolution to the high energy flux of their own industrializations. }{\insrsid13784217 
\par }{\insrsid10436910 \tab We may now summarize our answer to the questions raised in the introduction.}{\insrsid2493746  First, is it possible to control pollution?}{\insrsid14113699  If we mean by this }{\insrsid9708099 many of }{\insrsid14113699 t}{
\insrsid9708099 he commonly accepted controls through}{\insrsid14113699  technology, the answer must be an emphatic no.}{\insrsid15664313 
 According to thermodynamic reasoning, we can order or "arrange" a part of the local environment only at the expense of disordering the whole. Thus}{\insrsid1645027 ,}{\insrsid15664313  local pollution control, which depends on energy inputs}{
\insrsid87449 ,}{\insrsid15664313  can only result in greater pollution of the total ( global )}{\insrsid14040459  }{\insrsid15664313 system.}{\insrsid14040459  T}{\insrsid6759774 
his result does not of course preclude pollution control through such means as}{\insrsid11620340  technological innovations or administrative }{\insrsid6759774 actions which decrease energy inputs.}{\insrsid14549393 
 Thus we can effectively ban a pollutant such as a pesticide, shut down an industry, or substitute a more efficient technology.}{\insrsid15755742  Of course such actions may have their price in loss of convenience or jobs}{\insrsid5988150  or}{
\insrsid15755742  in increases in the price of goods.}{\insrsid10436910 
\par }{\insrsid8719218 \tab Secondly, is there really an entity like "clean}{\insrsid11550275  energy'? }{\insrsid7275349 According to the foregoing analysis we must conclude that clean technological energy is a contradiction in terms.}{\insrsid14420470 
 Once an energetic process is initiated, the process itself determines the energy path of dissipation and the resultant pollutants, unless additional energy, with its own burden of pollutants, is brought to bear through control technology.}{
\insrsid10031652  In this way energy produced by so-called "clean energy sources" is immediately converted to the societal mix of dirty energy forms.}{\insrsid2112770  The same reasoning applies to the concepts of "hard" vs. "soft" technologies.}{
\insrsid8719218 
\par }{\insrsid7100191 \tab We see then}{\insrsid6454429 ,}{\insrsid7100191  that as far as the foregoing analysis is concern
ed, there is nothing whatever to encourage the technologic optimist who favors the type of economic growth that depends on ever increasing energy inputs.}{\insrsid7015099  Indeed, as Georgescu-Roe}{\insrsid656553 gen}{\super\insrsid656553 2 }{
\insrsid656553  has pointed out, }{\insrsid16257590 there is little more sola}{\insrsid656553 ce in the steady state economy
, since this at very least requires a steady input of energy, which may be very large for large populations. There is also very little to buoy up the spirits of environmental optimists, who tend not only to favor a steady state, but also retain a naive fa
ith in the possibility of pollution "control" by means of technological devices.}{\insrsid7945868  Such are the enigmas and dilemmas we now confront.}{\insrsid14297225 
 To them sophisticated analysis may indeed bring insights, but only self-denial and austerity can bring solutions.}{\insrsid16714279  }{\insrsid7100191 
\par }{\insrsid5396294 
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid5396294 {\b\insrsid5396294\charrsid5396294 NOTES AND REFERENCES}{\b\insrsid5396294 
\par }{\insrsid13638945\charrsid13638945 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid13638945 {\insrsid13638945\charrsid13638945 1. Mueller, R. F. }{\i\insrsid13638945\charrsid13638945 Thermodynamics of Environmental Degradation.}{\insrsid13638945 
 National Aeronautics and Space Admin}{\insrsid16719041 istration Document X-644-71-121, 1971.}{\insrsid13638945 
\par }{\insrsid2057762 
\par 2. Georgescu-Roegen has discussed analogous myths which infect economic thought: Georgescu-Roegen, Nicholas,}{\i\insrsid2057762\charrsid16719041  Southern Economic Journal 41}{\insrsid2057762 , 347, 1957.
\par }{\insrsid16719041 
\par 3. Cambel, A. B., }{\i\insrsid16719041\charrsid16719041 Physics Today}{\insrsid16719041  }{\i\insrsid16719041\charrsid16719041 23}{\insrsid16719041 , 38, 1970.
\par }{\insrsid7697315 
\par 4. Press, Frank, }{\i\insrsid7697315\charrsid7697315 Science 200,}{\insrsid7697315  731, 1978.
\par }{\insrsid9459531 
\par 5. Odum, H. T., }{\i\insrsid9459531\charrsid3167955 Environment, Power and Society}{\insrsid3167955 . John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, 1971.}{\insrsid9459531 
\par }{\insrsid11618313 
\par 6. Council on Environmental Quality, Executive Office of the President "Environme}{\insrsid200966 ntal Quality, The Ninth Annual R}{\insrsid11618313 eport of the Council on Environmental Quality." 1978
\par 
\par 7. Fair}{\insrsid4220791 e}{\insrsid11618313 s, V. M., }{\i\insrsid11618313\charrsid4220791 Thermodynamics}{\insrsid11618313 . The McMillan Co., New York, 1962.
\par }{\insrsid1653490 
\par 8. Miller,G. Tyler, Jr.}{\i\insrsid1653490\charrsid1653490 , Energetics, Kinetics and Life}{\insrsid1653490 . Wadsworth, Belmont, California, 1971.}{\insrsid1653490\charrsid13638945 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid14423452 {\insrsid7158202 
\par }{\insrsid16604760 9. Kakela, P. J.,}{\i\insrsid16604760\charrsid16604760  Science 202}{\insrsid16604760 , 1151, 1975.
\par }{\insrsid10635620 
\par 10. Rossini, F. D., Pitzer, K. S., }{\insrsid7893969 Taylor, W. J., Ebert, J. P., Kilpatrick, J. E., Becket, C. W., Williams, M. G. and Werner, H. G. Selected Values of Properties of hydrocarbons. National Bureau of Standards Circular 461, 1947.}{
\insrsid10635620 
\par }{\insrsid8724614 
\par 11. Mueller, R. F. and Saxena , S. K. }{\i\insrsid8724614\charrsid8724614 Chemical Petrology with Applications to the Terrestrial Planets and}{\insrsid8724614  }{\i\insrsid8724614\charrsid8724614 Meteorites.}{\insrsid8724614 
 Springer Verlag, New York, 1977.
\par }{\insrsid7433853 
\par 12. Council on Environmental Quality, Executive Office of the Pre}{\insrsid200966 sident "Environmental Quality, T}{\insrsid7433853 he Eight Annual Report of the Co}{\insrsid6951206 uncil on Environmental Quality"}{\insrsid7433853  1977.
\par }{\insrsid8278429 
\par 13. Galloway, J. N., Likens, G. E. and Edgerton, E. S. }{\i\insrsid8278429\charrsid16713644 Science 194}{\insrsid8278429 , 722, 1976.
\par }{\insrsid6951206 
\par 14. Mueller, R. F.,}{\i\insrsid6951206\charrsid6951206  Science 192}{\insrsid6951206 , 11, 1976.
\par 
\par 15. Council on Environmental Quality, Executive Office of the President "Environmental Quality, The Seventh Annual Report of the Council on Environmental Quality."  1976.
\par }{\insrsid13334883 
\par 16. Lovins, A. B.,}{\i\insrsid13334883\charrsid4552226  Soft Energy Paths: Toward a Durable Peace. }{\insrsid13334883 Friends of the Earth-Ballinger, Cambridge, Mass., 1977.
\par }{\insrsid15219062 
\par 17. Hammond, A. L. }{\i\insrsid15219062\charrsid15219062 Science 194}{\insrsid15219062 , 172, 1976.
\par 
\par 18. Weinberg, A., }{\i\insrsid15219062\charrsid15219062 Science 177}{\insrsid15219062 , 27, 1972.
\par 
\par 19. Hannon, B., }{\i\insrsid15219062\charrsid15219062 Science 189}{\insrsid15219062 , 95, 1975.
\par 
\par 20. Herendeen, R. A.,}{\i\insrsid15219062\charrsid15219062  Am. Soc. Mech. Eng. Tech. Digest}{\insrsid15219062  73-WA/ENER-8.
\par }{\insrsid11471970 
\par 21. Green, Mark,}{\i\insrsid11471970\charrsid11471970  Environmental Action 10}{\insrsid11471970 , 22, 1979.
\par 
\par 22. Berg, C. A.,}{\i\insrsid11471970\charrsid9053404  Science 184}{\insrsid11471970 , 264,1974.}{\insrsid11471970\charrsid6568001 
\par }{\insrsid3362881 \tab }{\insrsid3362881\charrsid9175470 
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid10039285 {\insrsid10039285 
\par }{\insrsid10039285\charrsid10039285 
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid9549 {\insrsid8914826   }{\insrsid9549\charrsid9549 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid14813323 {\insrsid13591443\charrsid14239721 
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid8741958 {\insrsid8741958 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid8741958 {\insrsid8741958\charrsid10494305 
\par }}